A/ bismi al-ll_ahi ar-ra.hm_ani ar-ra.hiimi /A

    In the Name of God, the Clement, the Merciful


A/ al-.hamdu li-ll_ahi alladhii a.zhara al-wujuuda min al-`adami /A

    Praise be to God Who hath made being to come forth from
    nothingness;

A/ wa-raqama `alY law.hi al-insaani min asraari al-qidami /A

    graven upon the tablet of man the secrets of preexistence;

A/ wa-`alama-hu min al-bayaani maa laa-yu`lamu /A

    taught him from the mysteries of divine utterance that which he
    knew not;

A/ wa-ja`Alá-hu kitaabaN mubiinaN li-man 'aamana wa astaslama /A

    made him a Luminous Book unto those who believed and surrendered
    themselves;

A/ wa-ashhada khalqa kulliN shay'iN fii h_adhaa az-zamaani al-mu.zlami
a.s-.saylami /A

    caused him to witness the creation of all things in this black
    and ruinous age,

A/ wa-an.taqa-hu fii qu.tbi al-baqaa'i `alY al-la.hni al-badii`i /A

    and to speak forth from the apex of eternity with a wondrous
    voice in the Excellent Temple:

A/ fii al-haykali al-mukarramu layashhada al-kulla fii nafsi-hi
bi-nafsi-hi fii maqaamiN tajalliyiN rabbi-hi /A

    to the end that every man may testify, in himself, by himself, in
    the station of the Manifestation of his Lord,

A/ bi-anna-hu laa-il_aha illaa huwa /A

    that verily there is no God save Him,

A/ wa-layu.sila al-kullu bi-dh_alika ilY dhurwaTi al-.haqaa'iqi /A

    and that every man may thereby win his way to the summit of
    realities,

A/ .hattY laa-yushaahida a.haduN shay'aN illaa wa qad yarY al-ll_aha
fii-hi /A

    until none shall contemplate anything whatsoever but that he
    shall see God therein.


A/ wa-'u.sallY wa-'usallama `alY awwaliN ba.hriN tasha~`aba min ba.hri
al-hawiiyah /A

    And I praise and glorify the first sea which hath branched from
    the ocean of the Divine Essence,

A/ wa-awwaliN .sub.hiN laa-.ha `an ufuqi al-a.hadiyyaTi /A

    and the first morn which hath glowed from the Horizon of Oneness,

A/ wa-awwaliN shamsiN ashraqat fii samaa'i al-azaliyyaTi /A

    and the first sun which hath risen in the Heaven of Eternity,

A/ wa-awwaliN naariN uwqadat min mi.sbaa.hi al-qidamiyyaTi fii
mishkuuTi al-waa.hidiyyaTi /A

    and the first fire which was lit from the Lamp of Preexistence in
    the lantern of singleness:

A/ alladhii kaana a.hmadaN fii malakuuti al-`aalamiini /A

    He who was <<^a.hmad>> in the kingdom of the exalted ones,

A/ wa-mu.hammadaN fii malaa'i al-muqarrabiini /A

    and <<^mu.hammad>> amongst the concourse of the near ones,

A/ wa-ma.hmuudaN fii jabaruuti al-mukhli.siini /A

    and <<^ma.hmuud>> in the realm of the sincere ones.

A/ ``wa-iyyaamaN tada`uu falahu al-asmaa'i al-.husnYi fii quluubi
al-`aarifiini'' /A

    ``\dots{} by whichsoever (name) ye will, invoke Him: He hath most
    excellent names'' in the hearts of those who know.

A/ wa-`alY 'aali-hi wa-.sa.hbi-hi tasliimaN kathiiraN daa'imaN abadaN
/A

    And upon His household and companions be abundant and abiding and
    eternal peace!


A/ wa ba`da qad sami`ta maaghannat warqaa'i al-`irfaanu `alY afnaaniN
sidraTiN fuwaadika /A

    Further, we have harkened to what the nightingale of knowledge
    sang on the boughs of the tree of thy being,

A/ wa `arafta maagharradat .hamaamaTi al-iiqaanu `alY agh.saaniN
shajaraTiN qalbika /A

    and learned what the dove of certitude cried on the branches of
    the bower of thy heart.

A/ ka-innii wajdatu ravaa'i.hi a.t-.tayiba min qamii.siN .hubbika /A

    Methinks I verily inhaled the pure fragrances of the garment of
    thy love,

A/ wa adrakta tamaami li-qaa'ika fii mulaa.hi.zaTiN kitaabika /A

    and attained thy very meeting from perusing thy letter.

A/ wa lammaa balaghta ishaaraatika fii fanaa'iki fii al-ll_ahi /A

    And since I noted thy mention of thy death in God, and thy life
    through Him,

A/ wa-baqaa'ika bi-hi wa-.hubbika a.hibbaa'i al-ll_ahi wa ma.zaahiriN
asmaa'u-hi wa-ma.taali`iN .sifaati-hi /A

    and thy love for the beloved of God and the Manifestations of His
    Names and the Dawning-Points of His Attributes---

A/ lidhaa adhkurulaka ishaaraati qudsiiyaTaN sha`sha`aaniiyiTaN min
maraatibi al-jalaal /A

    I therefore reveal unto thee sacred and resplendent tokens from
    the planes of glory,

A/ litajdhibika ilY saa.haTi al-qudsi wa al-qurbi wa al-jamaal /A

    to attract thee into the court of holiness and nearness and
    beauty,

A/ wa tawa.salaka ilY maqaamiN laaturY fii al-wujuud illaa .tal`aTi
.ha.draTi ma.hbuubika /A

    and draw thee to a station wherein thou shalt see nothing in
    creation save the Face of thy Beloved One, the Honored,

A/ wa lan tarY al-khalq illaa kayuwmiN lam yakun a.hadiN madhkuuraN
/A

    and behold all created things only as in the day wherein none
    hath a mention.


A/ wa-hiya maaghanna bulbulu al-a.hadiyyaTu fii al-riyaa.di
al-ghawthiyyihi /A

    Of this hath the nightingale of oneness sung in the garden of
    <<^ghuwthiyyih>>.

A/ ``qawla-hu wa-ta.zhara `alY law.hi qalbika /A

    He saith: ``And there shall appear upon the tablet of thine heart

A/ raqawma la.taa'ifi asraari ``ittaqaw al-ll_aha yu`alimukumu
al-ll_ahu'' /A

    a writing of the subtle mysteries of `Fear God and God will give
    you knowledge';

A/ wa-yatadhakkara .taa'iri ruu.hika .ha.zaa'iri al-qidami /A

    and the bird of thy soul shall recall the holy sanctuaries of
    preexistence

A/ wa-ya.tiira fii fa.daa'i ``faaslakii subuli rabbika'' dhulilaN
bijanaa.hi al-shuwq /A

    and soar on the wings of longing in the heaven of `walk the
    beaten paths of thy Lord',

A/ wa-tajtanii min athmaaru al-'uns fii basaatiin ``kulii min kulli
ath-thamaraat'' '' /A

    and gather the fruits of communion in the gardens of `'Then feed
    on every kind of fruit.' ''


A/ intahY wa-`amrii yaa .habiiba lawtadhuuqa h_adhihi ath-thamaraat /A

    By My life, O friend, wert thou to taste of these fruits,

A/ min kha.dri h_adhihi as-sunbulaati al-llatii nabatat fii araa.diyi
al-ma`rifaT /A

    from the green garden of these blossoms which grow in the lands
    of knowledge,

A/ `inda tajalliyi anwaari adh-dhaat fii maraayaa al-asmaa'u wa
a.s-.sifaat /A

    beside the orient lights of the Essence in the mirrors of names
    and attributes---

A/ layaakhudha ash-shuwq zamaami a.s-.sabr wa al-i.s.tibaar `an
kaffika /A

    yearning would seize the reins of patience and reserve from out
    thy hand,

A/ wa yahtaza ruu.hika min bawaariqi al-anwaar /A

    and make thy soul to shake with the flashing light,

A/ wa tujdhibaka min al-wa.tani at-turaabii ilY al-wa.tani al-a.sliya
al-il_ahii fii qu.tbi al-ma`aanii /A

    and draw thee from the earthly homeland to the first, heavenly
    abode in the Center of Realities,

A/ wa ta.s`aduka ilY maqaamiN ta.tiira fii al-hawaa' kamaatamshiya
`alY at-turaab /A

    and lift thee to a plane wherein thou wouldst soar in the air
    even as thou walkest upon the earth,

A/ wa tarka.da `alY al-maa' kamaa tarka.da `alY al-ar.d /A

    and move over the water as thou runnest on the land.

A/ fahanii'aN lii wa laka wa liman samaa ilY samaa'i al-`irfaan wa
.sabaa'i qalbihu bimaahabba `alY riiaa.di /A

    Wherefore, may it rejoice Me, and thee, and whosoever mounteth
    into the heaven of knowledge, and whose heart is refreshed by
    this,

A/ sarrihu .sabaa'i al-iiqaan min sabaa'i ar-ra.hman /A

    that the wind of certitude hath blown over the garden of his
    being, from the Sheba of the All-Merciful.


A/ wa as-salaamu `alY man ittaba`a al-hudY /A

    Peace be upon him who followeth the Right Path!


va ba`d maraatib-i seyr-i saalikaan-raa az maskan-i khaakii
bi-va.tan-i il_ahii haft rutbih mu`ayan namuudih-and

    And further: The stages that mark the wayfarer's journey from the
    abode of dust to the heavenly homeland are said to be seven.

chinaanchih ba`.d-ii haft vaadii va ba`.d-ii haft shahr dhikr
kardih-and

    Some have called these Seven Valleys, and others, Seven Cities.

va guftih-and kih saalik taa az nafs hijrat nanamaayad va iin
asfaar-raa .tey nakunad

    And they say that until the wayfarer taketh leave of self, and
    traverseth these stages,
    
bi-ba.hr-i qurb va vi.saal vaarid nashavad va az khamr-i bii-mithaal
nachishad

    he shall never reach to the ocean of nearness and union, nor
    drink of the peerless wine.

avval vaadii .talab ast markab-i iin vaadii .sabr ast

    The first is the Valley of Search.  The steed of this Valley is
    patience;

va musaafir dar iin safar bii .sabr bi-jaa-ii narisad va bi-maq.suud
vaa.sil nashavad

    without patience the wayfarer on this journey will reach nowhere
    and attain no goal.

va baayad hargiz afsurdih nagardad agar .sad hizaar saal sa`ii kunad
va jamaal-i duust nabiinad pazhmurdih nashavad

    Nor should he ever be downhearted; if he strive for a hundred
    thousand years and yet fail to behold the beauty of the Friend,
    he should not falter.

ziiraa mujaahidiin-i ka`bih-i ``fiinaa'' bi-bishaarat-i
``lanahdiyannahum subulanaa'' masruur-and

    For those who seek the <<^ka`bih>> of ``for Us'' rejoice in the
    tidings: ``In our ways will We guide them.''

va kamar-i khidmat dar .talab bi-ghaayat mu.hkam bastih-and va dar
har aan az makaan-i ghaflat bi-imkaan-i .talab safar kunand

    In their search, they have stoutly girded up the loins of
    service, and seek at every moment to journey from the plane of
    heedlessness into the realm of being.

hiich band-ii iishaan-raa man` nanamaayad va hiich pand-ii sad
nakunad

    No bond shall hold them back, and no counsel shall deter them.


va shar.t ast iin `ibaad-raa kih dil-raa kih manba`-i khaziinih-i
il_ahiyyih ast az har naqsh-ii paak kunand

    It is incumbent on these servants that they cleanse the heart---
    which is the wellspring of divine treasures--- from every
    marking,

va az taqliid kih az athar-i aabaa' va ajdaad ast i`raa.d namaayand

    and that they turn away from imitation, which is following the
    traces of their forefathers and sires,

va abvaab-i duustii va dushmanii-raa baa kull-i ahl-i ar.d masduud
kunand

    and shut the door of friendliness and enmity upon all the people
    of the earth.


va .taalib dar iin safar bi-maqaam-ii risad kih hamih-i
muwjuudaat-raa dar .talab-i duust sargashtih biinad

    In this journey the seeker reacheth a stage wherein he seeth all
    created things wandering distracted in search of the Friend.

chih ya`quub-haa biinad kih dar .talab-i yuusuf aavaarih maandih-and

    How many a Jacob will he see, hunting after his Joseph;

`aalam-ii .habiib biinad kih dar .talab-i ma.hbuub davaan-and

    he will behold many a lover, hasting to seek the Beloved,

va jahaan-ii `aashiq mulaa.hi.zih kunad kih dar pey-i ma`shuuq ravaan

    he will witness a world of desiring ones searching after the one
    Desired.

va dar har aan-ii amr-ii mushaahidih kunad va dar har saa`at-ii bar
sirr-ii mu.tali` gardad

    At every moment he findeth a weighty matter, in every hour he
    becometh aware of a mystery;

ziiraa kih dil az har do jahaan bardaashtih va `azm-i ka`bih-i
jaanaan namuudih

    for he hath taken his heart away from both worlds, and set out
    for the <<^ka'bih>> of the Beloved.

va dar har qadam-ii i`aanat-i gheybii uu-raa shaamil shavad va
juush-i .talab-ash ziiaadih gardad

    At every step, aid from the Invisible Realm will attend him and
    the heat of his search will grow.


.talab-raa baayad az majnuun-i `ishq andaazih girift

    One must judge of search by the standard of the <<^majnuun>> of
    Love.

.hikaayat kunand kih ruuz-ii majnuun-raa diidand khaak miibiikht va
ashg miiriikht

    It is related that one day they came upon Majnun sifting the
    dust, and his tears flowing down.

guftand chih miikunii guft leylii-raa miijuuyam

    They said, ``What doest thou?''  He said, ``I seek for
    <<^leylii>>.''

guftand vaay bar to leylii az ruu.h-i paak va to az khaak .talab
miikunii

    They cried, ``Alas for thee!''  <<^leylii>> is of pure spirit,
    and thou seekest her in the dust!''

guft hamih jaa dar .talab-ash miikuusham shaayad dar jaa-ii bijuuyam

    He said, ``I seek her everywhere; haply somewhere I shall find
    her.''


balii dar turaab rabbu al-arbaab justan agar chih nazd-i `aaqil
qabii.h ast l_akin bar kamaal-i jidd va .talab daliil ast

    Yea, although to the wise it be shameful to seek the Lord of
    Lords in the dust, yet this betokeneth intense ardor in
    searching.

A/ ``man .talaba shay'aN wajadda wajad'' /A

    ``Whoso seeketh out a thing with zeal shall find it.''

.taalib-i .saadiq juz vi.saal-i ma.tluub chiiz-ii najuuyad va
.habiib-raa juz vi.saal-i ma.hbuub maq.suud-ii nabaashad

    The true seeker hunteth naught but the object of his quest, and
    the lover hath no desire save union with his beloved.

va iin .talab-i .taalib-raa .haa.sil nashavad magar binithaar aanchih
hast

    Nor shall the seeker reach his goal unless he sacrifice all
    things.

ya`nii aanchih diidih va shaniidih va fahmiidih hamih-raa bi-nafii-i
``laa'' manfii saazad taa bi-shahristaan-i jaan kih madiinih-i
``illaa'' ast vaa.sil shavad

    That is, whatever he hath seen, and heard, and understood, all
    must he set at naught, that he may enter the realm of the spirit,
    which is the City of God.

himmat-ii baayad taa dar .talab-ash kuushiim va jahd-ii baayad taa az
shahd-i va.sl-ash nuushiim

    Labor is needed, if we are to seek Him; ardor is needed, if we
    are to drink of the honey of reunion with Him;

agar az iin jaam nuush kuniim `aalam-ii faraamuush kuniim

    and if we taste of this cup, we shall cast away the world.


va saalik dar iin safar bar har khaak-ii jaalis shavad va dar har
bilaad-ii saakin gardad

    On this journey the traveler abideth in every land and dwelleth
    in every region.

az har vajh-ii .talab-i jamaal-i duust kunad va dar har diiaar
.talab-i yaar namaayad

    In every face, he seeketh the beauty of the Friend; in every
    country he looketh for the Beloved.

baa har jam`-ii mujtami` shavad va baa har sar-ii hamsarii namaayad

    He joineth every company, and seeketh fellowship with every soul,

kih shaayad dar sar-ii sirr-i ma.hbuub biinad va yaa az .suurat-ii
jamaal-i ma.hbuub mushaahidih kunad

    that haply in some mind he may uncover the secret of the Friend,
    or in some face he may behold the beauty of the Loved one.


va agar dar iin safar bi-i`aanat-i baar-ii az yaar-i bii-nishaan
nishaan yaaft

    And if, by the help of God, he findeth on this journey a trace of
    the traceless Friend,

va buu-i yuusuf-i gumgashtih az bashiir-i a.hadiyyih shaniid

    and inhaleth the fragrance of the long-lost Joseph from the
    heavenly messenger,

fuwraN bi-vaadii-i `ishq qadam gudhaarad va az naar-i `ishq
bigudaazad

    he shall straightway step into the Valley of Love and be
    dissolved in the fire of love.

dar iin shahr aasmaan-i jadhb buland shavad va aaftaab-i jahaantaab-i
shuwq .taali` gardad va naar-i `ishq bar-afruuzad

    In this city the heaven of ecstasy is upraised and the
    world-illuming sun of yearning shineth, and the fire of love is
    ablaze;

va chuun naar-i `ishq bar-afruukht kharman-i `aql bi-kulii bisuukht

    and when the fire of love is ablaze, it burneth to ashes the
    harvest of reason.


dar iin vaqt saalik az khuwd va gheyr-i khuwd bii-khabar ast

    Now is the traveler unaware of himself, and of aught besides
    himself.

nah jahl va `ilm daanad va nah shakk va yaqiin nah .sub.h-i hidaayat
shinaasad va nah shaam-i .dilaalat

    He seeth neither ignorance nor knowledge, neither doubt nor
    certitude; he knoweth not the morn of guidance from the night of
    error.

az kufr va iimaan har do dar gariiz va samm-i qaatil-ash dil-padhiir

    He fleeth both from unbelief and faith, and deadly poison is a
    balm to him.

iin-ast kih `a.t.taar guftih

    Wherefore <<`^a.t.taar>> saith:

3in> kufr-i kaafir-raa va diin-i diindaar-raa
3in> dharrih-i dard-at dil-i `a.t.taar-raa

    > For the infidel, error---for the faithful, faith;
    > For <<`^a.t.taar>>'s heart, an atom of Thy pain.

markab-i iin vaadii dard ast

    The steed of this Valley is pain;

va agar dard nabaashad hargiz iin safar tamaam nashavad

    and if there be no pain this journey will never end.

va `aashiq dar iin rutbih juz ma`shuuq khiiaal-ii nadaarad va juz
ma.hbuub panaah-ii najuuyad

    In this station the lover hath no thought save the Beloved, and
    seeketh no refuge save the Friend.

va dar har aan .sad jaan raayigaan dar rah-i jaanaan dahad va dar har
qadam-ii hizaar sar dar paa-i duust andaazad

    At every moment he offereth a hundred lives in the path of the
    Loved one, at every step he throweth a thousand heads at the feet
    of the Beloved.


ey baraadar-i man taa bi-mi.sr-i `ishq darnyaa-ii bi-yuusuf-i
jamaal-i duust vaa.sil nashavii

    O My Brother!  Until thou enter the Egypt of love, thou shalt
    never come to the Joseph of the Beauty of the Friend;

va taa chuun ya`quub az chashm-i .zaahirii nagudharii chashm-i
baa.tin nagushaa'ii

    and until, like Jacob, thou forsake thine outward eyes, thou
    shalt never open the eye of thine inward being;

va taa bi-naar-i `ishq nayafruuzii bi-yaar-i shuwq nayaamiizii

    and until thou burn with the fire of love, thou shalt never
    commune with the Lover of Longing.


va `aashiq-raa az hiich chiiz parvaa niist va az hiich .durr-ii
.darar nah

    A lover feareth nothing and no harm can come nigh him:

az naar sard-ash biinii va az daryaa khushk-ash yaabii

    Thou seest him chill in the fire and dry in the sea.

5.5in> nishaan-i `aashiq aan baashad kih sard-ash biinii az duuzakh
5.5in> nishaan-i `aarif aan baashad kih khushk-ash biinii az daryaa

    > A lover is he who is chill in hell fire;
    > A knower is he who is dry in the sea.


`ishq hastii qabuul nakunad va zindigii nakhwaahad

    Love accepteth no existence and wisheth no life:

.hayaat dar mamaat biinad va `izzat az dhillat juuyad

    He seeth life in death, and in shame seeketh glory.

bisyaar huush baayad taa laayiq-i juush-i `ishq shavad

    To merit the madness of love, man must abound in sanity;

va bisyaar sar baayad taa qaabil-i kamand-i duust gardad

    to merit the bonds of the Friend, he must be full of spirit.

mubaarak gardan-ii kih dar kamand-ash uftad va far-khandih sar-ii kih
dar raah-i mu.habbat-ash bi-khaak uftad

    Blessed the neck that is caught in His noose, happy the head that
    falleth on the dust in the pathway of His love.

pas ey duust az nafs bii-gaanih sho taa bi-yigaanih pey barii va az
khaakdaan-i faanii bugdhar taa dar aashyaan-i il_ahii jaay giirii

    Wherefore, O friend, give up thy self that thou mayest find the
    Peerless one, pass by this mortal earth that thou mayest seek a
    home in the nest of heaven.

niistii baayad taa naar-i hastii bar-afruuzii va maqbuul-i raah-i
`ishq shavii

    Be as naught, if thou wouldst kindle the fire of being and be fit
    for the pathway of love.

3.5in> nakunad `ishq nafs-i zindih qabuul
3.5in> nakunad baaz muush-i murdih shikaar

    > Love seizeth not upon a living soul,
    > The falcon preyeth not on a dead mouse.


`ishq dar har aan-ii `aalam-ii bisuuzad va dar har diiaar kih `alam
bar-afraazad viiraan saazad

    Love setteth a world aflame at every turn, and he wasteth every
    land where he carrieth his banner.

dar mamlikat-ash hastii-raa vujuud-ii nah va dar sal.tanat-ash
`aaqilaan-raa maqarr-ii nah

    Being hath no existence in his kingdom; the wise wield no command
    within his realm.

nahang-i `ishq adiib-i `aql-raa bibal`ad va labiib-i daanish
bishkurad

    The leviathan of love swalloweth the master of reason and
    destroyeth the lord of knowledge.

haft daryaa biiaashaamad va `a.tash-i qalb-ash nayafsurad va A/ hal
min maziid /A guuyad

    He drinketh the seven seas, but his heart's thirst is still
    unquenched, and he saith, ``Is there yet any more?''

az khwiish bii-gaanih shavad va az har chih dar `aalam ast kinaarih
giirad

    He shunneth himself and draweth away from all on earth.

3.5in> baa do `aalam `ishq-raa bii-gaanigii
3.5in> andar uu haftaad o do diivaanigii

    > Love's a stranger to earth and heaven too;
    > In him are lunacies seventy-and-two.

.sad hizaar ma.zluumaan dar kamand-ash bastih va .sad hizaar
`aarifaan bi-tiir-ash khastih

    He hath bound a myriad victims in his fetters, wounded a myriad
    wise men with his arrow.

har surkh-ii kih dar `aalam biinii az qahr-ash daan va har zard-ii
kih dar rukhsaar biinii az zahr-ash shumur

    Know that every redness in the world is from his anger, and every
    paleness in men's cheeks is from his poison.

juz fanaa davaa'ii nabakhshad va juz dar vaadii-i `adam qadam
nagudhaarad

    He yieldeth no remedy but death, he walketh not save in the
    valley of the shadow;

va l_akin zahr-ash dar kaam-i `aashiq az shahd khuwsh-tar va
fanaa-ash dar na.zar-i .taalib az .sad hizaar baqaa ma.hbuub-tar ast

    yet sweeter than honey is his venom on the lover's lips, and
    fairer his destruction in the seeker's eyes than a hundred
    thousand lives.


pas baayad bi-naar-i `ishq .hijaab-haa-i nafs-i shey.taanii suukhtih
shavad

    Wherefore must the veils of the satanic self be burned away at
    the fire of love,

taa ruu.h baraa-i idraak maraatib-i siyyid-i ``luwlaak'' la.tiif va
paakiizih gardad

    that the spirit may be purified and cleansed and thus may know
    the station of the Lord of the Worlds.

5in> naar-i `ishq-ii bar-furuuz v jumlih hastii-haa bisuuz
5in> pas qadam bardaar v andar kuuy-i `ushshaaqaan gudhaar

    > Kindle the fire of love and burn away all things,
    > Then set thy foot into the land of the lovers.


va agar `aashiq bi-taa'iidaat khaaliq az minqaar-i shaahiin-i `ishq
bi-salaamat bugdharad dar mamlikat-i ma`rifat vaarid shavad

    And if, confirmed by the Creator, the lover escapes from the
    claws of the eagle of love, he will enter the Valley of Knowledge

va az shak bi-yaqiin aayad va az .zulmat-i .dilaalat-i havY bi-nuur-i
hidaayat-i taqvY raaji` gardad

    and come out of doubt into certitude, and turn from the darkness
    of illusion to the guiding light of the fear of God.

va chashm-i ba.siirat-ash baaz shavad va baa .habiib-i khuwd bi-raaz
mashghuul gardad

    His inner eyes will open and he will privily converse with his
    Beloved;

dar-i .haqiiqat va niyaaz bigushaayad va abvaab-i majaaz dar bandad
dar iin rutbih qa.daa-raa ri.daa dahad

    he will set ajar the gate of truth and piety, and shut the doors
    of vain imaginings.  He in this station is content with the
    decree of God,

va jang-raa .sul.h biinad va dar fanaa ma`aanii-i baqaa dark namaayad

    and seeth war as peace, and findeth in death the secrets of
    everlasting life.

va bi-chashm-i sar va sirr dar aafaaq iijaad va anfus-i `ibaad
asraar-i mu`aad biinad

    With inward and outward eyes he witnesseth the mysteries of
    resurrection in the realms of creation and the souls of men,

va .hikmat-i .samadaanii-raa bi-qalb-i ruu.haanii dar ma.zaahir
naamutinaahii-i il_ahii seyr farmaayad

    and with a pure heart apprehendeth the divine wisdom in the
    endless Manifestations of God.

dar ba.hr qa.trih biinad va dar qa.trih asraar-i ba.hr mulaa.hi.zih
kunad

    In the ocean he findeth a drop, in a drop he beholdeth the
    secrets of the sea.

3in> dil-i har dharrih-ii kih bishkaafii
3in> aaftaab-ii-sh dar miiaan biinii

    > Split the atom's heart, and lo!
    > Within it thou wilt find a sun.


va saalik dar iin vaadii dar aafariinish-i .haqq bi-biinish-i mu.tlaq
makhaalif va mughaayir nabiinad

    The wayfarer in this Valley seeth in the fashionings of the True
    one nothing save clear providence,

va dar har aan ``maa tarY fii khalqi ar-ra.hm_an min tafaawuti
faarija`i al-ba.sar hal tarY min fu.tuur'' guuyad

    and at every moment saith: ``No defect canst thou see in the
    creation of the God of Mercy: Repeat the gaze: Seest thou a
    single flaw?''

dar .zulm `adl biinad va dar `adl fa.dl mushaahidih kunad

    He beholdeth justice in injustice, and in justice, grace.

dar jahl `ilm-haa mastuur biinad va dar `ilm-haa .sad hizaar
.hikmat-haa aashikaar va huveydaa idraak namaayad

    In ignorance he findeth many a knowledge hidden, and in knowledge
    a myriad wisdoms manifest.

va qafas-i tan va havY bishkanad va bi-nafas-i ahl-i baqaa uns giirad

    He breaketh the cage of the body and the passions, and consorteth
    with the people of the immortal realm.

bi-nard-i baan-haa-i ma`navii .su`uud namaayad va bi-samaa' ma`aanii
bi-shitaabad

    He mounteth on the ladders of inner truth and hasteneth to the
    heaven of inner significance.

dar fulk-i A/ ``sanaryahum aayaatanaa fii al-aafaaq wa fii
anfusihum'' /A saakin shavad

    He rideth in the ark of ``we shall show them our signs in the
    regions and in themselves,''

va bar ba.hr-i A/ ``.hattY yatabbayyina lahum inahu al-.haq'' /A
saa'ir gardad

    and journeyeth over the sea of ``until it become plain to them
    that (this Book) is the truth.''

va agar .zulm-ii biinad .sabr namaayad va agar qahr biinad mihr aarad

    And if he meeteth with injustice he shall have patience, and if
    he cometh upon wrath he shall manifest love.


.hikaayat kunand `aashiq-ii saal-haa dar hijr-i ma`shuuq-ash jaan
miibaakht va dar aatish-i faraaq-ash miigudaakht

    There was once a lover who had sighed for long years in
    separation from his beloved, and wasted in the fire of
    remoteness.

az ghalabih-i `ishq .sadr-ash az .sabr khaalii maand va jism-ash az
ruu.h bii-zaarii just

    From the rule of love, his heart was empty of patience, and his
    body weary of his spirit;

va zindigii dar faraaq-raa az nifaaq miishumurd va az aafaaq
bi-ghaayat dar i.htiraaq buud

    he reckoned life without her as a mockery, and time consumed him
    away.

chih ruuz-haa kih az hijr-ash raa.hat najustih va basaa shab-haa kih
az dard-ash nakhuftih

    How many a day he found no rest in longing for her; how many a
    night the pain of her kept him from sleep;

az .da`f badan chuun aahii gashtih va az dard-i dil chuun vaay shudih

    his body was worn to a sigh, his heart's wound had turned him to
    a cry of sorrow.

bi-yik shurbih-i va.sl-ash hizaar jaan raayigaan miidaad va muyassar
nimiishud

    He had given a thousand lives for one taste of the cup of her
    presence, but it availed him not.

.tabiib-aan az `ilaaj-ash dar maandand va mu'aanisaan az uns-ash
duurii justand

    The doctors knew no cure for him, and companions avoided his
    company;

balii marii.d-i `ishq-raa .tabiib chaarih nadaanad magar `inaayat-i
.habiib dast-ash giirad

    yea, physicians have no medicine for one sick of love, unless the
    favor of the beloved one deliver him.


baar-ii `aaqibat shajar-i rijaa-ash thamar-i ya's bakhshiid va naar-i
umiid-ash biyafsurd

    At last, the tree of his longing yielded the fruit of despair,
    and the fire of his hope fell to ashes.

taa aankih shab-ii az jaan bii-zaar shud va az khaanih bi-baazaar raft

    Then one night he could live no more, and he went out of his
    house and made for the marketplace.

naagaah uu-raa `asas-ii ta`aaqub namuud

    on a sudden, a watchman followed after him.

uu az piish taazaan va `asas az pey davaan

    He broke into a run, with the watchman following;

taa aankih `asas-haa jam` shudand va az har .taraf raah-i faraar bar
aan bii-qaraar bastand

    then other watchmen came together, and barred every passage to
    the weary one.

va aan faqiir az dil miinaaliid va bi-a.traaf miidaviid va baa khuwd
miiguft

    And the wretched one cried from his heart, and ran here and
    there, and moaned to himself:

iin `asas `izraa'iil-i man ast kih bi-iin ta`jiil dar .talab-i man
ast va yaa shaddaad-i bilaad ast kih dar kiin-i `ibaad ast

    ``Surely this watchman is <<`^izraa'iil>>, my angel of death,
    following so fast upon me; or he is a tyrant of men, seeking to
    harm me.''

aan khastih-i tiir-i `ishq bi-paa davaan buud va bi-dil naalaan

    His feet carried him on, the one bleeding with the arrow of love,
    and his heart lamented.

taa bi-diivaar-i baagh-ii rasiid va bi-hizaar za.hmat va mi.hnat
baalaa-i diivaar raft diivaar-ii bi-ghaayat buland diid

    Then he came to a garden wall, and with untold pain he scaled it,
    for it proved very high;

az jaan gudhasht va khuwd-raa dar baagh andaakht

    and forgetting his life, he threw himself down to the garden.


diid ma`shuuq-ash dar dast chiraagh-ii daarad va tafa.hu.s-i
angushtar-ii miinamaayad kih az uu gum shudih buud

    And there he beheld his beloved with a lamp in her hand,
    searching for a ring she had lost.

chuun aan `aashiq-i dil-daadih ma`shuuq-i dil burdih-raa diid aahii
bar-kashiid va dast bi-du`aa bar-daasht

    When the heart-surrendered lover looked on his ravishing love, he
    drew a great breath and raised up his hands in prayer, crying:

kih ey khudaa iin `asas-raa `izzat diH va duwlat bakhsh va baaqii
daar

    ``o God!  Give Thou glory to the watchman, and riches and long
    life.

kih iin `asas jibri'iil buud kih daliil-i iin `aliil gasht yaa
israafiil buud kih .hayaat bakhsh-i iin dhaliil shud

    For the watchman was Gabriel, guiding this poor one; or he was
    <<^israafiil>>, bringing life to this wretched one!''


va aanchih guft fii al-.haqiiqih durust buud ziiraa mulaa.hi.zih shud
kih iin .zulm munkir-i `asas chiqadr `adl-haa dar sar daasht

    Indeed, his words were true, for he had found many a secret
    justice in this seeming tyranny of the watchman,

va chih ra.hmat-haa dar pardih panhaan namuudih buud

    and seen how many a mercy lay hid behind the veil.

bi-yik qahr tashnih-i .sa.hraa-i `ishq-raa bi-ba.hr-i ma`shuuq
vaa.sil namuud va .zulmat-i faraaq-raa bi-nuur-i vi.saal ruwshan
farmuud

    Out of wrath, the guard had led him who was athirst in love's
    desert to the sea of his loved one, and lit up the dark night of
    absence with the light of reunion.

ba`iid-ii-raa bi-bustaan-i qurb jaay daad va `aliil-ii-raa
bi-.tabiib-i qalb raah namuud

    He had driven one who was afar, into the garden of nearness, had
    guided an ailing soul to the heart's physician.


.haal aan `aashiq agar aakhir biin buud dar avval bar `asas ra.hmat
miinamuud va du`aa-ash miiguft va aan .zulm-raa `adl miidiid

    Now if the lover could have looked ahead, he would have blessed
    the watchman at the start, and prayed on his behalf, and he would
    have seen that tyranny as justice;

chuun az aakhir ma.hjuub buud dar avval naalih aaghaaz namuud va
bi-shikaayat zabaan gushuud

    but since the end was veiled to him, he moaned and made his
    plaint in the beginning.

va l_akin musaafir-aan-i .hadiiqih-i `irfaan chuun aakhir-raa dar
avval biinand

    Yet those who journey in the garden land of knowledge, because
    they see the end in the beginning,

lah_adhaa dar jang .sul.h va dar qahr aashtii mulaa.hi.zih kunand

    see peace in war and friendliness in anger.


va iin rutbih ahl-i iin vaadii ast

    Such is the state of the wayfarers in this Valley;

va ahl-i vaadii-haa-i fuwq iin vaadii avval va aakhir-raa yik biinand
balkih nah avval biinand nah aakhir laa avval va laa aakhir biinand

    but the people of the Valleys above this see the end and the
    beginning as one; nay, they see neither beginning nor end, and
    witness neither ``first'' nor ``last.''

balkih ahl-i madiinih-i baqaa kih dar ruw.dih-i kha.draa saakinand
laa avval va laa aakhir ham nabiinand az avval-haa dar guriizand va
bi-aakhir-haa darsitiiz

    Nay rather, the denizens of the undying city, who dwell in the
    green garden land, see not even ``neither first nor last''; they
    fly from all that is first, and repulse all that is last.

ziiraa kih `avaalim-i asmaa'-raa .tey namuudih-and va az `avaalim-i
.sifaat chuun barq dar gudhashtih-and

    For these have passed over the worlds of names, and fled beyond
    the worlds of attributes as swift as lightning.

 chinaanchih miifarmaayad ``kamaali al-tuw.hiid nafyi a.s-.sifaat
`anhu''

    Thus is it said: ``Absolute Unity excludeth all attributes.''

va dar .zill-i dhaat maskan giriftih-and

    And they have made their dwelling-place in the shadow of the
    Essence.


iin-ast kih khwaajih `abdul-ll_ah qadasa al-l_ah ta`aalY sirrihu
al-`aziiz

    Wherefore, relevant to this, <<^khaajih ^`abdul-ll_ah>>--- may
    God the Most High sanctify his beloved spirit---

dar iin maqaam nuktih-i daqiiq-ii va kalamih-i baliigh-ii dar
ma`nii-i ``ihdinaa a.s-.siraa.ta al-mustaqiim'' farmuudih-and

    hath made a subtle point and spoken an eloquent word as to the
    meaning of ``Guide Thou us on the straight path,''

va aan iin-ast kih bi-namaay bi-maa raah-i raast

    which is: ``Show us the right way,

ya`nii bi-mu.hibat-i dhaat-i khuwd musharraf daar taa az iltifaat
bi-khuwd va gheyr-i to aazaad gashtih

    that is, honor us with the love of Thine Essence, that we may be
    freed from turning toward ourselves and toward all else save
    Thee,

bi-tamaam-ii giriftaar-i to gardiim juz to nadaaniim juz to nabiiniim
va juz to nayandiishiim

    and may become wholly Thine, and know only Thee, and see only
    Thee, and think of none save Thee.''


balkih az iin maqaam ham baalaa ravand

    Nay, these even mount above this station,

chinaanchih miifarmaayad ``al-mu.habbaTi .hijaabiN bayna al-mu.hibbi
wa al-ma.hbuub'' biish az iin guftan maraa dastuur niist

    wherefore it is said: Love is a veil betwixt the lover and the
    loved one; More than this I am not permitted to tell.


dar iin vaqt .sub.h-i ma`rifat .taali` shud va chiraagh-haa-i seyr va
suluuk khaamuush gasht

    At this hour the morn of knowledge hath arisen and the lamps of
    wayfaring and wandering are quenched.

3.75in> vahm-i muusY baa hamih nuur o hunar
3.75in> shud az aan ma.hjuub to bii par mapar

    > Veiled from this was Moses,
    > Though all strength and light;
    > Then thou who hast no wings at all,
    > Attempt not flight.


agar ahl-i raaz va niiaaz-ii bi-par-haa-i himmat-i uwliiaa parvaaz
kun

    If thou be a man of communion and prayer, soar up on the wings of
    assistance from Holy Souls,

taa asraar-i duust biinii va bi-anvaar-i ma.hbuub rasii A/
inaalill_ahi wa innaa ilayhi raaji`uun /A

    that thou mayest behold the mysteries of the Friend and attain to
    the lights of the Beloved, ``Verily, we are from God and to Him
    shall we return.''


va saalik ba`d az seyr-i vaadii-i ma`rifat kih aakhir-i maqaam-i
ta.hdiid ast bi-avval-i maqaam-i tuw.hiid vaa.sil shavad

    After passing through the Valley of knowledge, which is the last
    plane of limitation, the wayfarer cometh to the Valley of Unity

va az ka's-i tajriid binuushad va dar ma.zaahir-i tafriid seyr
namaayad

    and drinketh from the cup of the Absolute, and gazeth on the
    Manifestations of Oneness.

dar iin maqaam .hijaab-i kithrat bar-dirad va az `avaalim-i shahvat
bar-parad va dar samaa'i va.hdat `uruuj namaayad

    In this station he pierceth the veils of plurality, fleeth from
    the worlds of the flesh, and ascendeth into the heaven of
    singleness.

bi-guush-i il_ahii bishnavad va bi-chashm-i rabbaanii asraar-i
.san`-i .samdaanii biinad

    With the ear of God he heareth, with the eye of God he beholdeth
    the mysteries of divine creation.

bi-khalvat-khaanih-i duust qadam gudhaarad va ma.hram-i suraadiq-i
ma.hbuub shavad

    He steppeth into the sanctuary of the Friend, and shareth as an
    intimate the pavilion of the Loved One.

va dast-i .haq az jeyb-i mu.tlaq bar-aarad va asraar-i qudrat .zaahir
namaayad

    He stretcheth out the hand of truth from the sleeve of the
    Absolute; he revealeth the secrets of power.

va.sf va ism va rasm az khuwd nabiinad va.sf-i khuwd-raa dar va.sf-i
.haq biinad

    He seeth in himself neither name nor fame nor rank, but findeth
    his own praise in praising God.

va ism-i .haq-raa dar ism-i khuwd mulaa.hi.zih namaayad

    He beholdeth in his own name the name of God;

hamih aavaaz-haa az shah daanad va jamii`-i naghmaat-raa az uu
shinavad

    to him, ``all songs are from the King,'' and every melody from
    Him.

bar kursii-i A/ ``qul kull min `inda al-ll_ah'' /A jaalis shavad va
bar basaa.t-i A/ ``laa .huula va laa quvaTi illaa bi-al-ll_ah'' /A
raa.hat giirad

    He sitteth on the throne of ``Say, all is from God,'' and taketh
    his rest on the carpet of ``There is no power or might but in
    God.''

va dar ashyaa' bi-na.zar-i tuw.hiid mushaahidih kunad

    He looketh on all things with the eye of oneness,

va ishraaq-i tajallii-i shams-i il_ahii-raa az mashriq-i huviiyat bar
hamih-i mumkinaat yik-saan biinad

    and seeth the brilliant rays of the divine sun shining from the
    dawning-point of Essence alike on all created things,

va anvaar-i tuw.hiid-raa bar jamii`-i muwjuudaat muwjuud va .zaahir
mushaahidih kunad

    and the lights of singleness reflected over all creation.


va ma`luum-i aan-janaab buudih kih jamii`-i ikhtilaafaat `avaalim
kuwn kih dar maraatib-i suluuk saalik mushaahidih miikunad az
na.zar-i khuwd-i saalik ast

    It is clear to thine Eminence that all the variations which the
    wayfarer in the stages of his journey beholdeth in the realms of
    being, proceed from his own vision.

mathaalii dar iin maqaam dhikr miishavad taa iin ma`nY tamaam ma`luum
gardad

    We shall give an example of this, that its meaning may become
    fully clear:

mulaa.hi.zih dar shams-i .zaahir-ii farmaa'iid kih bar hamih-i
muwjuudaat va mumkinaat bi-yik ishraaq tajallii miinamaayad

    Consider the visible sun; although it shineth with one radiance
    upon all things,

va ifaa.dih-i nuur bi-amr-i sul.taan-i .zuhuur bar hamih-i ashyaa'
miifarmaayad

    and at the behest of the King of Manifestation bestoweth light on
    all creation,

va liikun dar har mu.hall bi-iqti.daa-i ista`daad aan mu.hall .zaahir
miishavad va a`.taa-i fey.d miikunad

    yet in each place it becometh manifest and sheddeth its bounty
    according to the potentialities of that place.

mithl-i iin-kih dar mir aat bi-qar.s-haa va heya't-haa jilvih
miinamaayad va iin bi-vaas.tih-i li.taafat-i khuwd-i miraat ast

    For instance, in a mirror it reflecteth its own disk and shape,
    and this is due to the sensitivity of the mirror;

va dar baluur naar i.hdaath miikunad va dar saayir-i ashyaa hamaan
athar-i tajallii .zaahir ast nah qur.s

    in a crystal it maketh fire to appear, and in other things it
    showeth only the effect of its shining, but not its full disk.

va bi-aan athar har shay'ii-raa bi-amr-i mu'aththir bi-isti`daad-i uu
tarbiiyat miikunad chinaanchih mushaahidih miikuniid

    And yet, through that effect, by the command of the Creator, it
    traineth each thing according to the quality of that thing, as
    thou observest.


va hamchiniin alvaan ham bi-iqti.daa-i mu.hall .zaahir miishavad

    In like manner, colors become visible in every object according
    to the nature of that object.

mithl-i iin-kih dar zujaajih-i zard tajallii-i zard va dar sifiid
tajallii-i sifiid va dar surkh tajallii-i surkh mulaa.hi.zih
miishavad

    For instance, in a yellow globe, the rays shine yellow; in a
    white the rays are white; and in a red, the red rays are
    manifest.

pas iin ikhtilaafaat az mu.hall ast nah az ishraaq-i .diiyaa'

    Then these variations are from the object, not from the shining
    light.

va agar mu.hall maani` daashtih baashad mithl-i jidaar va saqf aan
mu.hall bi-al-marrih az tajallii-i shams ma.hruum maanad va aaftaab
bar aan nataabad

    And if a place be shut away from the light, as by walls or a
    roof, it will be entirely bereft of the splendor of the light,
    nor will the sun shine thereon.


iin-ast kih ba`.d-ii az nufuus-i .da`iifih chuun araa.dii-i
ma`rifat-raa bi-jadaar-i nafs va havY

    Thus it is that certain invalid souls have confined the lands of
    knowledge within the wall of self and passion,

va .hijaab-i ghaflat va `amY .haayil namuudih-and

    and clouded them with ignorance and blindness,

lihidhaa az ishraaq-i shams ma`aanii va asraar-i ma.hbuub laayazaalii
ma.hjuub maandih-and

    and have been veiled from the light of the mystic sun and the
    mysteries of the Eternal Beloved;

va az javaahir-i .hikmat-i diin-i mubiin-i siyyida al-mur saliin duur
maandih-and

    they have strayed afar from the jewelled wisdom of the lucid
    Faith of the Lord of Messengers,

va az .haram-i jamaal ma.hruum shudand

    have been shut out of the sanctuary of the All-Beauteous One,

va az ka`bih-i jalaal mahjuur

    and banished from the <<^ka'bih>> of splendor.

iin-ast rutbih-i ahl-i zamaan

    Such is the worth of the people of this age!


va agar bulbul-ii az gil-i nafs bar-khiizad va bar shaakhsaar-i gul-i
qalb jaay giirad

    And if a nightingale soar upward from the clay of self and dwell
    in the rose bower of the heart,

va bi-nighamaat-i .hijaazii va aavaaz-haa-i khuwsh-i `araaqii
asraar-i il_ahii dhikr namaayad

    and in Arabian melodies and sweet <<^iiraanian>> songs recount
    the mysteries of God---

kih .harf-ii az aan jamii`-i jasad-haa-i murdih-raa .hayaat-i
taazih-i jadiid bakhshad

    a single word of which quickeneth to fresh, new life the bodies
    of the dead,

va ruu.h-i quds-ii bar `a.zaam-i ramiimih-i mumkinaat mabdhuul daarad

    and bestoweth the Holy Spirit upon the moldering bones of this
    existence---

hizaar changaal-i .hasad va minqaar-i bugh.d biinii kih qa.sd-i uu
namaayand va baa tamaam-i jidd dar halaak-ash kuushand

    thou wilt behold a thousand claws of envy, a myriad beaks of
    rancor hunting after Him and with all their power intent upon His
    death.


balii ju`al-raa buu-i khuwsh naa-khuwsh aayad va mazkuum-raa
raayi.hih-i .tayib thamar nadahad

    Yea, to the beetle a sweet fragrance seemeth foul, and to the man
    sick of a rheum a pleasant perfume is as naught.

iin-ast kih baraa-i irshaad-i `avaam guftih-and

    Wherefore, it hath been said for the guidance of the ignorant:

4in> daf` kun az maghz o az biinii zukaam
4in> taa kih rii.hu al-ll_ah dar aayad dar mashaam

    > Cleanse thou the rheum from out thine head 
    > And breathe the breath of God instead.


baar-ii ikhtilaaf-i mu.hall vaa.di.h va mubarhan shud

    In sum, the differences in objects have now been made plain.

va ammaa na.zar-i saalik vaqt-ii dar mu.hall ma.hduud ast ya`nii dar
zujaajaat-i seyr miinamaayad

    Thus when the wayfarer gazeth only upon the place of
    appearance--- that is, when he seeth only the many-colored
    globes---

iin-ast kih zard va surkh va sifiid biinad

    he beholdeth yellow and red and white;

bi-iin jahat ast kih jidaal beyn-i `ibaad bar paa shudih

    hence it is that conflict hath prevailed among the creatures,

va `aalam-raa ghubaar tiirih az anfus-i ma.hduudih faraag-raftih

    and a darksome dust from limited souls hath hid the world.

va ba`.d-ii na.zar bi-ishraaq-i .duw' daarand va barkh-ii az khamar-i
va.hdat nuushiidih-and juz shams chiiz-ii nabiinand

    And some do gaze upon the effulgence of the light; and some have
    drunk of the wine of oneness and these see nothing but the sun
    itself.


pas bi-sabab-i seyr-i iin sih maqaam-i mukhtalif fahm-i saalikiin va
bayaan-i iishaan mukhtalif miishavad

    Thus, for that they move on these three differing planes, the
    understanding and the words of the wayfarers have differed;

iin-ast kih athar-i ikhtilaaf dar `aalam .zaahir shudih va miishavad

    and hence the sign of conflict doth continually appear on earth.

ziiraa kih ba`.d-ii dar rutbih-i tuw.hiid vaaqifand va az aan `aalam
sukhan guuyand

    For some there are who dwell upon the plane of oneness and speak
    of that world,

va barkh-ii dar `avaalim-i ta.hdiid qaa'im-and va ba`.d-ii dar
maraatib-i nafs va barkh-ii bi-al-amrih mu.htajib-and

    and some inhabit the realms of limitation, and some the grades of
    self, while others are completely veiled.

iin-ast kih juhhaal-i `a.sr kih az partuv-i jamaal na.siib
naburdih-and bi-ba`.d-ii maqaal takallum miinamaayand

    Thus do the ignorant people of the day, who have no portion of
    the radiance of Divine Beauty, make certain claims,

va dar har `a.sr va zamaan bar ahl-i lajjih-i tuw.hiid vaarid
mii-aavarand aanchih-raa kih khuwd bi-aan laayiq va sizaa vaarand

    and in every age and cycle inflict on the people of the sea of
    oneness what they themselves deserve.

A/ ``wa-law yu'aa khidhu al-ll_ahu an-naasa bi-maakasabUA maataraka
`alY .zahrihaa min da-'aabbaTiN wa-l_akin yu'akhkhiruhum 'ilY 'ajaliN
musammYaN'' /A

    ``Should God punish men for their perverse doings, He would not
    leave on earth a moving thing!  But to an appointed term doth He
    respite them\ldots''[<<^qur'aan>> 35:45]


ey baraadar-i man qalb-i la.tiif bi-manzalih-i aa'iinih ast

    O My Brother!  A pure heart is as a mirror;

aan-raa bi-.siiqal-i .hubb va inqi.taa` az maasavii al-ll_ah paak kun

    cleanse it with the burnish of love and severance from all save
    God,

taa aftaab-i .haqiiqii dar aan jilvih namaayad va .sub.h-i azalii
.taali` shavad

    that the true sun may shine within it and the eternal morning
    dawn.

ma`nii-i ``laa yas`anii ar.dii va laa samaa'ii va l_akin yas`anii
qalbi `abdii al-mu'min'' raa aashikaar va huveydaa biinii

    Then wilt thou clearly see the meaning of ``Neither doth My earth
    nor My heaven contain Me, but the heart of My faithful servant
    containeth Me.''

va jaan dar dast giirii va bi-hizaar .hasrat nithaar-i yaar-i taazih
namaa'ii

    And thou wilt take up thy life in thine hand, and with infinite
    longing cast it before the new Beloved One.


va chuun anvaar-i tajallii-i sul.taan-i a.hadiyyih bar `arsh-i qalb
va dil juluus namuud

    Whensoever the light of Manifestation of the King of Oneness
    settleth upon the throne of the heart and soul,

nuur-i uu dar jamii`-i a`.daa va arkaan .zaahir miishavad

    His shining becometh visible in every limb and member.

aan vaqt sirr-i .hadiith-i mashhuur sar az .hajaab-i deyjuur
bar-aarad

    At that time the mystery of the famed tradition gleameth out of
    the darkness:

A/ ``laa zaal al-`abd yataqarraba ilayya bi-an-navaafil .hattY
a.hbabtahu fa-idhaa a.hbabtahu kun-tu sam`ihi aladhii yasma`a bihi''
/A alkh

    ``A servant is drawn unto Me in prayer until I answer him; and
    when I have answered him, I become the ear wherewith he
    heareth...''

ziiraa kih .saa.hib-i bayt dar bayt-i khuwd tajallii namuudih

    For thus the Master of the house hath appeared within His home,

va arkaan-i bayt hamih az nuur-i uu ruwshan va munavvar shudih

    and all the pillars of the dwelling are ashine with His light.

va fi`l va athar-i nuur az muniir ast

    And the action and effect of the light are from the Light-Giver;

iin-ast kih hamih bih uu .harkat namaayand va bi-iraadih-i uu qiiaam
kunand

    so it is that all move through Him and arise by His will.

va iin-ast aan chashmih-ii kih muqarabiin az aan miinuushand

    And this is that spring whereof the near ones drink,

chinaanchih miifarmaayad A/ ```aynaN yashriba bihaa al-muqarribuun''
/A

    as it is said: ``A fount whereof the near unto God shall
    drink...''


va diigar aankih mabaadaa dar iin bayaanaat raayi.hih-i .huluul

    However, let none construe these utterances to be
    anthropomorphism,

va yaa tanazzulaat-i `avaalim-i .haq dar maraatib-i khalq ravd va bar
aan-jinaab shubhih shavad

    nor see in them the descent of the worlds of God into the grades
    of the creatures; nor should they lead thine Eminence to such
    assumptions.

ziiraa kih bi-dhaatih muqaddas ast az .su`uud va nazuul va az dakhuul
va khuruuj

    For God is, in His Essence, holy above ascent and descent,
    entrance and exit;

lam yazal az .sifaat-i khalq ghanii buudih va khwaahad bud

    He hath through all eternity been free of the attributes of human
    creatures, and ever will remain so.

va nashnaakhtih uu-raa a.had-ii va bi-kunh-i uu raah nayaaftih
nafs-ii

    No man hath ever known Him; no soul hath ever found the pathway
    to His Being.

kull-i `urafaa dar vaadii-i ma`rifat-ash sar gardaan va kull-i
uuliyaa dar idraak-i dhaat-ash .heyraan manazzih ast

    Every mystic knower hath wandered far astray in the valley of the
    knowledge of Him; every saint hath lost his way in seeking to
    comprehend His Essence.

az idraak-i har mudrik-ii va muta`aalii ast az `irfaan har `aarif-ii

    Sanctified is He above the understanding of the wise; exalted is
    He above the knowledge of the knowing!

as-sabiilu masduud va a.t-.talabu marduud

    The way is barred and to seek it is impiety;

daliilih aayaatih va vujuudih ithbaatih

    His proof is His signs; His being is His evidence.


iin-ast kih `aashiq-aan ruu-i jaanaan guftih-and A/ ``yaaman dalla
`alY dhaatihi bi-dhaatihi wa tanazzaha `an mujaanisaTi
mukhluuqaatihi'' /A

    Wherefore, the lovers of the face of the Beloved have said: ``O
    Thou, the One Whose Essence alone showeth the way to His Essence,
    and Who is sanctified above any likeness to His creatures.''

`adam-i .sirf kujaa tavaanad dar maydaan-i qidam asb davaanad va
saayih-i faanii kujaa bi-khuwrshiid-i baaqii risad

    How can utter nothingness gallop its steed in the field of
    preexistence, or a fleeting shadow reach to the everlasting sun?

.habiib-i A/ ``luwlaak'', ``maa `arafnaaka'' /A farmuudih

    The Friend hath said, ``But for Thee, we had not known Thee,''

va ma.hbuub-i A/ ``uwaadnY'', ``maabilaghnaaka'' /A guftih

    and the Beloved hath said, ``nor attained Thy presence.''


balii iin dhikr-haa kih dar maraatib-i `irfaan dhikr miishavad

    Yea, these mentionings that have been made of the grades of
    knowledge

ma`rifat-i tajalliiaat-i aan shams-i .haqiiqat ast kih dar maraayaa
tajallii miifarmaayad

    relate to the knowledge of the Manifestations of that Sun of
    Reality, which casteth Its light upon the Mirrors.

va tajallii-i aan nuur dar quluub hast va l_akin bi-.hujibaat-i
nafsaaniyyih va shu'uunaat-i `ara.diyyih ma.hjuub ast

    And the splendor of that light is in the hearts, yet it is hidden
    under the veilings of sense and the conditions of this earth,

chuun sham` ziir-i faanuus-i .hadiid chuun faanuus murtafi` shud
nuur-i sham` .zaahir gardad

    even as a candle within a lantern of iron, and only when the
    lantern is removed doth the light of the candle shine out.


va hamchiniin chuun kharq-i .hujibaat-i afkiyyih az vajh-i qalb
namaa'ii anvaar-i a.hadiyyih .taali` shavad

    In like manner, when thou strippest the wrappings of illusion
    from off thine heart, the lights of oneness will be made
    manifest.


pas ma`luum shud kih az baraa-i tajalliiaat ham dukhuul va khuruuj
niist

    Then it is clear that even for the rays there is neither entrance
    nor exit---

taa chih risad bi-aan juwhar-i vujuud va sirr-i maq.suud

    how much less for that Essence of Being and that longed-for
    Mystery.

ey baraadar man dar iin maraatib az ruu-i ta.hqiiq seyr namaa nah az
ruu-i taqliid

    O My Brother, journey upon these planes in the spirit of search,
    not in blind imitation.

va saalik-raa duur baash-i kalimaat man` nakunad va heymanih-i
ishaarat sad nanamaayad

    A true wayfarer will not be kept back by the bludgeon of words
    nor debarred by the warning of allusions.

4.25in> pardih chih baashad miiaan-i `aashiq o ma`shuuq
4.25in> sadd-i sikandar nah maani` ast o nah .haa'il

    > How shall a curtain part the lover and the loved one? 
    > Not Alexander's wall can separate them!


asraar bisyaar va aghyaar bii-shumaar

    Secrets are many, but strangers are myriad.

sirr-i ma.hbuub-raa daftar-haa kifaayat nakunad va bi-iin alvaa.h
itmaam nayaabad baa iin-kih .harf-ii biish niist va ramzii biish nah

    Volumes will not suffice to hold the mystery of the Beloved One,
    nor can it be exhausted in these pages, although it be no more
    than a word, no more than a sign.

A/ ``al-`ilmu nuq.taTuN kaththarihu al-jaahiluun'' /A

    ``Knowledge is a single point, but the ignorant have multiplied
    it.''


va az ham-iin maqaam ikhtilaafaat-i `avaalim-raa ham mulaa.hi.zih kun

    On this same basis, ponder likewise the differences among the
    worlds.

agar chih `avaalim-i il_ahii naamutinaahii ast va l_akin ba`.d-ii
chihaar rutbih dhikr namuudih-and

    Although the divine worlds be never ending, yet some refer to
    them as four:

`aalam-i zamaan va aan aan-ast kih az baraa-i uu avval va aakhir
baashad

    The world of time (<<zamaan>>), which is the one that hath both a
    beginning and an end;

va `aalam-i dahr ya`nii avval daastih baashad va aakhir-ash padiid
nabaashad

    the world of duration (<<dahr>>), which hath a beginning, but
    whose end is not revealed;

va `aalam-i sarmad kih avval-ii mulaa.hi.zih nashavad va aakhir-ash
mafhuum shavad

    the world of perpetuity (<<sarmad>>), whose beginning is not to
    be seen but which is known to have an end;

va `aalam-i azal kih nah avval-ii mushaahidih shavad va nah aakhir-ii

    and the world of eternity (<<azal>>), neither a beginning nor an
    end of which is visible.

agar chih dar iin bayaanaat ikhtilaaf bisyaar ast agar taq.siil dhikr
shavd kisaalat afzaayad

    Although there are many differing statements as to these points,
    to recount them in detail would result in weariness.

chinaanchih ba`.d-ii `aalam-i sarmad-raa bii ibtidaa va intahaa
guftih-and

    Thus, some have said that the world of perpetuity hath neither
    beginning nor end,

va `aalam-i azal-raa gheyb-i manii`-i laa-yudrak dhikr namuudih-and

    and have named the world of eternity as the invisible,
    impregnable Empyrean.

va ba`.d-ii `avaalim-i laahuut va jabaruut va malakuut va naasuut
guftih-and

    Others have called these the worlds of the Heavenly Court
    (<<^laahuut>>), of the Empyrean Heaven (<<^jabaruut>>), of the
    Kingdom of the Angels (<<^malakuut>>), and of the mortal world
    (<<^naasuut>>).


safar-haa-i sabiil-i `ishq-raa chihaar shumurdih-and

    The journeys in the pathway of love are reckoned as four:

A/ min al-khalqi ilii al-.haqq va min al-.haqqi ilii al-khalq va min
al-khalqi ilii al-khalq va min al-.haqqi ilii al-.haq /A

    From the creatures to the True One; from the True One to the
    creatures; from the creatures to the creatures; from the True One
    to the True One.


va hamchiniin bisyaar bayaanaat az `urafaa va .hukamaa-i qabl hast
kih bandih muta`ri.d nashudam

    There is many an utterance of the mystic seers and doctors of
    former times which I have not mentioned here,

va duust nadaaram kih adhkaar qabl bisyaar i.zhaar shavad

    since I mislike the copious citation from sayings of the past;

ziiraa kih aqvaal gheyr-raa dhikr namuudan daliil ast bar `uluum-i
kasbii nah bar muwhibat il_ahii

    for quotation from the words of others proveth acquired learning,
    not the divine bestowal.

va l_akin iin-qadr ham kih dhikr shud bi-vaas.tih-i `aadat-i naas ast

    Even so much as We have quoted here is out of deference to the
    wont of men and after the manner of the friends.

va ta-assii bi-a.s.haab va `alaavih bar iin dariin risaalih iin
bayaanaat nagunjad

    Further, such matters are beyond the scope of this epistle.

va `adam-i iqbaal bi-dhikr-i aqvaal-i iishaan nah az ghuruur ast bal
bi-vaas.tih-i .zuhuur-i .hikmat va tajallii-i muwhibat ast

    Our unwillingness to recount their sayings is not from pride,
    rather is it a manifestation of wisdom and a demonstration of
    grace.

4.25in> gar khi.dr dar ba.hr kashtii-raa shikast
4.25in> .sad durustii dar shikast-i khi.dr hast

    > If <<^khi.dr>> did wreck the vessel on the sea, 
    > Yet in this wrong there are a thousand rights.

va illaa iin bandih khuwd-raa dar saa.hat-i yik-ii az a.hibaa-i
khudaa ma`duum miidaanam va mafquud miishumuram taa chih risad dar
basaa.t-i uulyaa

    Otherwise, this Servant regardeth Himself as utterly lost and as
    nothing, even beside one of the beloved of God, how much less in
    the presence of His holy ones.

A/ fasub.haana rabbii al-a`lY /A

    Exalted be My Lord, the Supreme!

va az iin-haa gudhashtih maq.suud dhikr-i maraatib-i saalikiin ast
nah bayaan-i aqvaal-i `aarifiin

    Moreover, our aim is to recount the stages of the wayfarer's
    journey, not to set forth the conflicting utterances of the
    mystics.


agar chih mithaal-i mukhta.sar-ii dar avval va aakhir-i `aalam nisbii
va i.daafii zadih shud

    Although a brief example hath been given concerning the beginning
    and ending of the relative world, the world of attributes,

mujaddad mithaal-ii diigar dhikr miishavad taa tamaam-i ma`aanii dar
qamii.s-i mithaal-ii .zaahir shavad

    yet a second illustration is now added, that the full meaning may
    be manifest.

mathalaN aan-jinaab dar khuwd mulaa.hi.zih farmaayand

    For instance, let thine Eminence consider his own self;

kih nisbat bi-pasar-i khuwd avvaland va nisbat bi-pidar-i khuwd
aakhir

    thou art first in relation to thy son, last in relation to thy
    father.

va dar .zaahir .hikaayat az .zaahir-i qudrat miikuniid dar `avaalim-i
.sun`-i il_ahii

    In thine outward appearance, thou tellest of the appearance of
    power in the realms of divine creation;

va dar baa.tin bar asraar-i baa.tin kih vadii`ih-i il_ahiyyih ast

    in thine inward being thou revealest the hidden mysteries which
    are the divine trust deposited within thee.

dar shumaa pas .sidq-i avvaliyyat va aakhiriyyat va .zaahiriyyat va
baa.tiniyyat bi-iin ma`nY kih dhikr shud bar shumaa miikunad

    And thus firstness and lastness, outwardness and inwardness are,
    in the sense referred to, true of thyself,

taa dar iin chihaar rutbih kih bi-shumaa `inaayat shud chihaar
rutbih-i il_ahiyyih-raa idraak farmaa'iid

    that in these four states conferred upon thee thou shouldst
    comprehend the four divine states,

taa bulbul-i qalb bar jamii`-i shaakhsaar-haa-i gul-i vujuud az gheyb
va shuhuud nidaa kunad

    and that the nightingale of thine heart on all the branches of
    the rosetree of existence, whether visible or concealed, should
    cry out:

A/ bi-anah ``huw al-awwal wa al-aakhir wa a.z-.zaahir wa al-baa.tin''
/A

    ``He is the first and the last, the Seen and the Hidden...''


va iin dhikr-haa dar maraatib-i `avaalim-i nisbat dhikr miishavad

    These statements are made in the sphere of that which is
    relative, because of the limitations of men.

va illaa aan rijaal-ii kih bi-qadam-ii `aalam-i nisbat va taqyiid-raa
.tey namuudih-and

    Otherwise, those personages who in a single step have passed over
    the world of the relative and the limited,

va bar basaa.t-i khuwsh-i tajriid saakin shudih-and

    and dwelt on the fair plane of the Absolute,

va dar `aalam-haa-i i.tlaaq va amr kheymih bar-afraakhtih-and

    and pitched their tent in the worlds of authority and command---

jamii`-i iin nisbat-haa-raa bi-naar-ii suukhtih-and

    have burned away these relativities with a single spark,

va hamih-i iin alfaa.z-raa bi-nam-ii ma.hv namuudih-and

    and blotted out these words with a drop of dew.

va dar yam-i ruu.h shinaavarii miinamaayand va dar havaa-i quds-i
nuur seyr miikunand

    And they swim in the sea of the spirit, and soar in the holy air
    of light.

diigar alfaa.z dar iin rutbih kujaa vujuud daarad taa avval yaa
aakhir yaa gheyr-i iin-haa ma`luum shavd va madhkuur aayad

    Then what life have words, on such a plane, that ``first'' and
    ``last'' or other than these be seen or mentioned!

dar iin maqaam avval nafs-i aakhir va aakhir nafs-i avval ast

    In this realm, the first is the last itself, and the last is but
    the first.

3.5in> aatish-ii az `ishq-i jaanaan bar-furuuz
3.5in> sar bi-sar fikr o `ibaadat-raa bisuuz

    > In thy soul of love build thou a fire 
    > And burn all thoughts and words entire.


ey duust-i man dar khuwd mulaa.hi.zih farmaa

    O my friend, look upon thyself:

kih agar pidar nimiishud-ii va pisar nadiidih buudii iin alfaa.z ham
nashaniidih buudii

    Hadst thou not become a father nor begotten a son, neither
    wouldst thou have heard these sayings.

pas .haal hamih-raa faraamuush kun taa dar mu.s.tabih-i tuw.hiid
nazd-i adiib-i `ishq biyaamuuzii

    Now forget them all, that thou mayest learn from the Master of
    Love in the schoolhouse of oneness,

va az A/ ``innaa'' /A bih ``raaji`uun'' rij`at kunii

    and return unto God,

va az baa.tin-i majaazii bi-maqaam-i .haqiqii-i khuwd vaa.sil gardii

    and forsake the inner land of unreality for thy true station,

va dar .zil-i shajarih-i daanish saakin shavii

    and dwell within the shadow of the tree of knowledge.


ey `aziiz nafs-raa faqiir nimaa taa dar `ar.sih-i buland-i ghanaa
vaarad shavii

    O thou dear one!  Impoverish thyself, that thou mayest enter the
    high court of riches;

va jisad-raa dhaliil kun taa az sharii`ih-i `izzat biyaashaamii

    and humble thy body, that thou mayest drink from the river of
    glory,

va bi-jamii`-i ma`aanii-i ash`aar kih su'aal farmuudii birasii

    and attain to the full meaning of the poems whereof thou hadst
    asked.


pas ma`luum shud kih iin maraatib bastih bi-seyr-i saalik ast

    Thus it hath been made clear that these stages depend on the
    vision of the wayfarer.

va dar har madiinih `aalam-ii biinad va dar har vaadii bi-chashmih-ii
risad va dar har .sa.hraa naghmih-ii shinavad

    In every city he will behold a world, in every Valley reach a
    spring, in every meadow hear a song.

valii shaah-baaz-i havaa-i ma`navii-raa shahnaaz-haa-i badii`-i
ruu.haanii dar dil ast

    But the falcon of the mystic heaven hath many a wondrous carol of
    the spirit in His breast,

va murgh-i `araaqii-raa aavaaz-haa-i khuwsh-i .hijaaz-ii dar sar

    and the Persian bird keepeth in His soul many a sweet Arab
    melody;

va l_akin mastuur buudih va mastuur khwaahad buud

    yet these are hidden, and hidden shall remain.

3.25in> gar biguuyam `aql-haa bar ham zanad
3.25in> var niviisam bas qalam-haa bishkanad

    > If I speak forth, many a mind will shatter, 
    > And if I write, many a pen will break.


A/ wa as-salaamu `alY man qa.ta`a h_adha as-safari al-a`lY wa
ittaba`a al-.haqqi bi-anvaari al-hudY /A

    Peace be upon him who concludeth this exalted journey and
    followeth the True One by the lights of guidance.


va saalik ba`d az qa.t`-i ma`aarij-i iin safar-i buland-i a`lY dar
madiinih-i istighnaa vaarid miishavad

    And the wayfarer, after traversing the high planes of this
    supernal journey, entereth the Valley of Contentment.

va dar iin vaadii nasaa'im-i istighnaa-i il_ahii-raa bibiinad kih az
baydaa-i ruu.h miivazad

    In this Valley he feeleth the winds of divine contentment blowing
    from the plane of the spirit.

va .hijaab-haa-i faqr-raa miisuuzad

    He burneth away the veils of want,

va A/ ``yuumi yaghnii al-ll_ah kulaN min sa`atihi'' /A raa
bi-chashm-i .zaahir va baa.tin dar gheyb va shihaadaT ashyaa'
mushaahidih farmaayad

    and with inward and outward eye, perceiveth within and without
    all things the day of: ``God will compensate each one out of His
    abundance.''

az .huzn bi-suruur aayad va az gham bi-fara.h raaji` shavad

    From sorrow he turneth to bliss, from anguish to joy.

qab.d va inqibaa.d-raa bi-bas.t va inbisaa.t tabdiil namaayad

    His grief and mourning yield to delight and rapture.


musaafiraan-i iin vaadii agar dar .zaahir bar khaak saakin-and

    Although to outward view, the wayfarers in this Valley may dwell
    upon the dust,

ammaa dar baa.tin bar rafraf-i ma`aanii jaalis

    yet inwardly they are throned in the heights of mystic meaning;

va az ni`mat-haa-i bii zavaal ma`navii marzuuq-and

    they eat of the endless bounties of inner significances,

va az sharaab-haa-i la.tiif-i ruu.haanii mashruub

    and drink of the delicate wines of the spirit.


zabaan dar taf.siil-i iin sih vaadii `aajiz ast va bayaan bi-ghaayat
qaa.sir

    The tongue faileth in describing these three Valleys, and speech
    falleth short.

qalam dar iin `ar.sih qadam nagudhaarad va midaad juz savaad thamar
nayaarad

    The pen steppeth not into this region, the ink leaveth only a
    blot.

bulbul-i qalb-raa dar iin maqaamaat navaa-haa-i diigar ast va
asraar-i diigar

    In these planes, the nightingale of the heart hath other songs
    and secrets,

kih dil az uu bi-juush va ruu.h dar khuruush

    which make the heart to stir and the soul to clamor,

va l_akin iin mu`ammaa-i ma`aanii-raa dil bi-dil baayad guft va
siinih bi-siinih baayad sipurd

    but this mystery of inner meaning may be whispered only from
    heart to heart, confided only from breast to breast.

5in> shar.h-i .haal-i `aarifaan dil bi-dil tavaanad guft
5in> iin nah shiivih-i qaa.sid v iin nah .hadd-i maktuub ast

    > Only heart to heart can speak the bliss of mystic knowers; 
    > No messenger can tell it and no missive bear it.

3.75in> A/ vaaskut `ajzaN `an umuuri kathiiraTiN
3.75in> bi-nu.tqii lan tu.h.sY wa luu qultu qallatiN /A

    > I am silent from weakness on many a matter, 
    > For my words could not reckon them and my speech would fall short.


ey rafiiq taa bi-.hadiiqih-i iin ma`aanii narasii az khamr-i baaqii-i
iin vaadii nachishii

    O friend, till thou enter the garden of such mysteries, thou
    shalt never set lip to the undying wine of this Valley.

va agar chishii az gheyr chashm puushii va az baadih-i istighnaa
binuushii

    And shouldst thou taste of it, thou wilt shield thine eyes from
    all things else, and drink of the wine of contentment;

va az hamih bugsalii va bih uu peyvandii va jaan dar rahash baazii va
ravaan raayigaan bar-afshaanii

    and thou wilt loose thyself from all things else, and bind
    thyself to Him, and throw thy life down in His path, and cast thy
    soul away.

agar chih gheyr-ii dar iin maqaam niist taa chashm puushii A/ ``kaana
al-ll_ahi wa lam yakun mi`ahu min shay'iN'' /A

    However, there is no other in this region that thou need forget:
    ``There was God and there was naught beside Him.''

ziiraa kih saalik dar iin rutbih jamaal-i duust-raa dar har shay'
biinad

    For on this plane the traveler witnesseth the beauty of the
    Friend in everything.

az naar rukhsaar-i yaar biinad va dar majaaz ramz-i .haqiiqat
mulaa.hi.zih kunad va az .sifaat sirr-i huviiyat mushaahidih namaayad

    Even in fire, he seeth the face of the Beloved.  He beholdeth in
    illusion the secret of reality, and readeth from the attributes
    the riddle of the Essence.

ziiraa pardih-haa-raa bi-aahii suukhtih va .hijaab-haa-raa
bi-nigaahii bar-daashtih

    For he hath burnt away the veils with his sighing, and unwrapped
    the shroudings with a single glance;

bi-ba.sar-i .hadiid dar .sun`-i jadiid seyr namaayad

    with piercing sight he gazeth on the new creation;

va bi-qalb-i raqiiq aathaar-i daqiqq idraak kunad

    with lucid heart he graspeth subtle verities.

A/ wa ja`alnaa al-yuum ba.sarika .hadiidaN /A shaahidi maqaal va
kaafii a.hvaal ast

    This is sufficiently attested by: ``And we have made thy sight
    sharp in this day.''


va saalik ba`d az seyr-i maraatib-i istighnaa-i ba.ht dar vaadii-i
.heyrat vaa.sil miishavad

    After journeying through the planes of pure contentment, the
    traveler cometh to the Valley of Wonderment

va dar ba.hr-haa-i `a.zamat ghuu.tih miikhwurad va dar har aan bar
.heyrat-ash mii-afzaayad

    and is tossed in the oceans of grandeur, and at every moment his
    wonder groweth.

gaah-ii haykal-i ghanaa-raa nafs-i faqr miibiinad va juwhar-i
istighnaa-raa .sirf-i `ajz

    Now he seeth the shape of wealth as poverty itself, and the
    essence of freedom as sheer impotence.

gaah-ii ma.hv-i jamaal-i dhuu-al-jalaal miishavad va gaah-ii az
vujuud-i khuwd biizaar

    Now is he struck dumb with the beauty of the All-Glorious; again
    is he wearied out with his own life.

iin .sar.sar-i .heyrat chih darakht-haa-i ma`aanii-raa kih az paa
andaakht va chih nufuus-haa-raa kih az nafs bar-andaakht

    How many a mystic tree hath this whirlwind of wonderment snatched
    by the roots, how many a soul hath it exhausted.

ziiraa kih iin vaadii saalik-raa dar inqilaab aavarad

    For in this Valley the traveler is flung into confusion,

va liikan iin .zuhuuraat dar na.zar-i vaa.sil bisyaar ma.hbuub va
marghuub ast

    albeit, in the eye of him who hath attained, such marvels are
    esteemed and well beloved.

va dar har aan `aalam-i badii`-ii va khalq-i jadiid-ii mushaahidih
kunad

    At every moment he beholdeth a wondrous world, a new creation,

va .heyrat bar .heyrat afzaayad ma.hv-i .sun`-i jadiid-i sul.taan-i
a.hadiyyih shavad

    and goeth from astonishment to astonishment, and is lost in awe
    at the works of the Lord of Oneness.


balii ey baraadar agar dar har khalq-ii tafakur namaa'iim

    Indeed, O Brother, if we ponder each created thing,

.sad hizaar .hikmat-i baalighih biiniim va .sad hizaar `uluum-i
badii`ih bii-aamuuziim

    we shall witness a myriad perfect wisdoms and learn a myriad new
    and wondrous truths.

az jumlih makhluuqaat nuwm ast

    One of the created phenomena is the dream. -- jww: jumlih-i?

mulaa.hi.zih kun chiqadr asraar dar uu vadii`ih gudhaastih shudih ast

    Behold how many secrets are deposited therein,

va chih .hikmat-haa dar uu makhzuun gashtih ast va chih `avaalim dar
uu mastuur maandih

    how many wisdoms treasured up, how many worlds concealed.

mulaa.hi.zih farmaa'iid kih shumaa dar bayt-ii miikhwaabiid va
dar-haa-i aan bayt bastih ast

    Observe, how thou art asleep in a dwelling, and its doors are
    barred;

yik martabih khuwd-raa dar shahr-i ba`iid-ii mushaahidih miikuniid
bii .harikat-i rijl va ta`ab-i jasad bi-aan shahr daakhil miishaviid

    on a sudden thou findest thyself in a far-off city, which thou
    enterest without moving thy feet or wearying thy body;

va bii za.hmat-i chashm mushaahidih miikuniid va bii mi.hnat-i guush
miishinaviid vi bii lisaan takalum miinamaa'iid

    without using thine eyes, thou seest; without taxing thine ears,
    thou hearest; without a tongue, thou speakest.

va gaahast kih aanchih imshab diidih-iid daH saal ba`d dar `aalam-i
zamaan bi-.hasab-i .zaahir bi-`eynih aanchih dar khwaab diidih-iid
miibiiniid

    And perchance when ten years are gone, thou wilt witness in the
    outer world the very things thou hast dreamed tonight.


.haal chand .hikmat ast kih dar iin nuwm mashhuud ast

    Now there are many wisdoms to ponder in the dream,

va gheyr-i ahl-i iin vaadii bar kamaahiya idraak nimiikunand

    which none but the people of this Valley can comprehend in their
    true elements.

avval aankih aan chih `aalam ast kih bii chashm va guush va dast va
lisaan .hukm-i hamih iin-haa dar uu ma`muul miishavad

    First, what is this world, where without eye and ear and hand and
    tongue a man puts all of these to use?

va thaanii aankih dar `aalam-i .zuhuur athar-i khwaab-raa imruuz
mushaahidih miikunii va liikan iin seyr-raa dar `aalam nuwm dar daH
saal qabl diidih'

    Second, how is it that in the outer world thou seest today the
    effect of a dream, when thou didst vision it in the world of
    sleep some ten years past?

.haal tafakkur namaa farq-i iin do `aalam va asraar-i muwdi`ih-i
aan-raa taa bita'yiidaat va mukaashifaat-i sub.haan-ii faa'iz shavii
va pey bi-`aalam-i quds barii

    Consider the difference between these two worlds and the
    mysteries which they conceal, that thou mayest attain to divine
    confirmations and heavenly discoveries and enter the regions of
    holiness.


va iin aayaat-raa .ha.drat-i baar-ii dar khalq gudhaashtih taa
mu.haqqiqiin inkaar-i asraar-i mu`aad nakunand va bi-aanchih va`dih
daadih shudih-and sahl nashmurand

    God, the Exalted, hath placed these signs in men, to the end that
    philosophers may not deny the mysteries of the life beyond nor
    belittle that which hath been promised them.

mithl-i iin-kih ba`.d-ii tamasuk bi-`aql justih va aanchih bi-`aql
nayaayad inkaar namaayand

    For some hold to reason and deny whatever the reason
    comprehendeth not,

va .haal aan-kih hargiz `uquul-i .da`iifih hamiin maraatib-i
madhkuurih-raa idraak nakunad magar `aql-i kullii-i rabbaanii

    and yet weak minds can never grasp the matters which we have
    related, but only the Supreme, Divine Intelligence can comprehend
    them:

4.75in> `aql-i juz'ii key tavaanad gasht bar qur'aan mu.hii.t
4.75in> `ankabuut-ii key tavaanad kard siimurgh-ii shikaar

    > How can feeble reason encompass the <<^qur'aan>>, 
    > Or the spider snare a phoenix in his web?


va iin `avaalim kull dar vaadii-i .heyrat dast dahad va mushaahidih
gardad

    All these states are to be witnessed in the Valley of Wonderment,

va saalik dar har aan ziiaadatii .talab namaayad va kasil nashavad

    and the traveler at every moment seeketh for more, and is not
    wearied.

iin-ast kih siyyid-i avvaliin va aakhiriin dar maraatib-i fikrat va
i.zhaar-i .heyrat A/ ``rabbi zidnii fiika ta.hayyuraa'' /A farmuudih

    Thus the Lord of the First and the Last in setting forth the
    grades of contemplation, and expressing wonderment hath said: ``O
    Lord, increase my astonishment at Thee!''


va hamchiniin tafakur dar tamaamiyat-i khalq-i insaan kun

    Likewise, reflect upon the perfection of man's creation,

kih iin hamih `avaalim va iin hamih maraatib dar uu mun.tavii va
mastuur shudih

    and that all these planes and states are folded up and hidden
    away within him.

3.1in> A/ ata.hsba innika jurmiN .saghiir
3.1in> wa fiika an.tavY al-`aalama al-akbar /A

    > Dost thou reckon thyself only a puny form 
    > When within thee the universe is folded?

pas jahd-ii baayad kih rutbih-i .heyvaanii ma`duum kuniim taa
ma`nii-i insaanii .zaahir shavad

    Then we must labor to destroy the animal condition, till the
    meaning of humanity shall come to light.


hamchiniin luqmaan kih az chashmih-i .hikmat nuushiidih va az ba.hr-i
ra.hmat chashiidih

    Thus, too, <<^luqmaan>>, who had drunk from the wellspring of
    wisdom and tasted of the waters of mercy,

bi-pisar-ash naataan bi-jahat-i ithbaat-i maqaamaat-i .hashr va muwt
hamiin khwaab-raa daliil aavurdih va mathal zadih

    in proving to his son Nathan the planes of resurrection and
    death, advanced the dream as an evidence and an example.

dariin maqaam dhikr miinamaa'iim taa dhikr-ii az aan javaan-i
ma.s.tabih-i tuw.hiid va piir-i maraatib-i ta`liim va tajriid az iin
bandih-i faanii baaqii bimaanad

    We relate it here, that through this evanescent Servant a memory
    may endure of that youth of the school of Divine Unity, that
    elder of the art of instruction and the Absolute.

farmuud ey pisar agar qaadir baashii kih nakhwaabii pas qaadir-ii bar
aankih namiirii

    He said: ``O Son, if thou art able not to sleep, then thou art
    able not to die.

va agar bitavaanii ba`d az khwaab biidaar nashavii miitavaanii kih
ba`d az marg ma.hshuur nagardii

    And if thou art able not to waken after sleep, then thou shalt be
    able not to rise after death.''


ey duust dil kih mu.hall-i asraar-i baaqiyih ast

    O friend, the heart is the dwelling of eternal mysteries,

mu.hall-i afkaar-i faanyih makun va sarmaayih-i `umr-i
giraan-maayih-raa bi-ishtighaal-i dunyaa-i faanyih az dast madih

    make it not the home of fleeting fancies; waste not the treasure
    of thy precious life in employment with this swiftly passing
    world.

az `aalam-i qudsii bi-turaab dil maband

    Thou comest from the world of holiness---bind not thine heart to
    the earth;

va ahl-i basaa.t-i uns-ii va.tan-i khaakii mapasand

    thou art a dweller in the court of nearness---choose not the
    homeland of the dust.


baar-ii dhikr-i iin maraatib-raa intihaa'ii nah

    In sum, there is no end to the description of these stages,

va iin bandih-raa az .sadamih-i ahl-i ruuz-i gaar a.hvaal-ii nah

    but because of the wrongs inflicted by the peoples of the earth,
    this Servant is in no mood to continue:

3.5in> iin sukhan naaqi.s bimaand va bii-qaraar
3.5in> dil nadaaram bii-dilam ma`dhuur daar

    > The tale is still unfinished and I have no heart for it---
    > Then pray forgive me.

qalam naalih miikunad va midaad miigiryad va jey.huun-i dil khuun
muwj miizanad

    The pen groaneth and the ink sheddeth tears, and the river of the
    heart moveth in waves of blood.

A/ ``lan yu.siibanaa ilaa maakitaba al-ll_ahi lanaa'' /A

    ``Nothing can befall us but what God hath destined for us.''

A/ wa as-salaamu `alY man ittaba`a al-hudY /A

    Peace be upon him who followeth the Right Path!


va saalik ba`d az irtiqaa-i bi-maraatib-i buland-i .heyrat
bi-vaadii-i faqr-i .haqiiqii va fanaa-i a.slii vaarid shavad

    After scaling the high summits of wonderment the wayfarer cometh
    to the Valley of True Poverty and Absolute Nothingness.

va iin rutbih maqaam-i fanaa-i az nafs va biqaa-i bi-al-ll_ah ast

    This station is the dying from self and the living in God,

va faqr az khuwd va ghanaa-i bi-maq.suud ast

    the being poor in self and rich in the Desired One.

va dar iin maqaam kih dhikr-i faqr miishavad ya`nii faqiir ast az
aanchih dar `aalam-i khalq ast va ghanii ast bi-aanchih dar
`avaalim-i .haq ast

    Poverty as here referred to signifieth being poor in the things
    of the created world, rich in the things of God's world.

ziiraa kih `aashiq-i .saadiq va .habiib-i muvaafiq chuun biliqaa-i
ma.hbuub va ma`shuuq rasiid

    For when the true lover and devoted friend reacheth to the
    presence of the Beloved,

az partuwi jamaal-i ma.hbuub va aatish-i qalb-i .habiib naar-ii
mushta`il shavad va jamii`-i saraadiqaat va .hujubaat raa bisuuzaanad

    the sparkling beauty of the Loved One and the fire of the lover's
    heart will kindle a blaze and burn away all veils and wrappings.

balkih aanchih baa uu ast .hattY maghz va puust mu.htariq gardad va
juz duust chiiz-ii namaanad

    Yea, all he hath, from heart to skin, will be set aflame, so that
    nothing will remain save the Friend.

3.75in> chuun tajallii kard uw.saaf-i qadiim
3.75in> pas bisuuzad va.sf-i .haadith-raa kaliim

    > When the qualities of the Ancient of Days stood revealed, 
    > Then the qualities of earthly things did Moses burn away.

va dar iin maqaam vaa.sil muqaddas ast az aanchih muta`alliq
bi-dunyaa-st

    He who hath attained this station is sanctified from all that
    pertaineth to the world.

pas agar dar nazd-i vaa.siliin-i ba.hr-i vi.saal az ashyaa'i
ma.hduudih kih muta`alliq bi-`aalam-i faanii ast yaaft nashavad

    Wherefore, if those who have come to the sea of His presence are
    found to possess none of the limited things of this perishable
    world,

chih az amvaal-i .zaahiriyyih baashad va chih az tafakkuraat-i
nafsiyyih ba's-ii niist

    whether it be outer wealth or personal opinions, it mattereth
    not.

ziiraa kih aanchih nazd-i khalq ast ma.hduud ast bi-.haduud-i iishaan
va aanchih nazd-i .haq ast muqaddas az aan

    For whatever the creatures have is limited by their own limits,
    and whatever the True One hath is sanctified therefrom;

iin bayaan-raa bisyaar fikr baayad taa paayaan aashkaar shavad

    this utterance must be deeply pondered that its purport may be
    clear.

A/ ``inna al-abraar yashribuuna min ka'si kaana mizaajihaa
kaafuuraa'' /A

    ``Verily the righteous shall drink of a winecup tempered at the
    camphor fountain.''

agar ma`nii-i kaafuur ma`luum shavad maq.suud-i .haqiiqii ma`luum
gardad

    If the interpretation of ``camphor'' become known, the true
    intention will be evident.

in maqaam az faqr ast kih miifarmaayad A/ ``al-faqru fakhrii'' /A

    This state is that poverty of which it is said, ``Poverty is My
    glory.''

va az baraa-i faqr-i baa.tinii va .zaahirii maraatib-haa va
ma`nii-haa ast kih dhikr aan-raa munaasib-i iin maqaam nadiidam

    And of inward and outward poverty there is many a stage and many
    a meaning which I have not thought pertinent to mention here;

lih_adhaa bi-`uhdih-i vaqt-ii gudhaashtam taa khudaa chih khwaahad va
qa.daa chih im.daa namaayad

    hence I have reserved these for another time, dependent on what
    God may desire and fate may seal.


va iin maqaam ast kih katharaat-i kull-i shay' dar saalik haalik
shavad

    This is the plane whereon the vestiges of all things are
    destroyed in the traveler,

va .tal`at-i vajh az mashriq-i baqaa sar az ghi.taa biiruun aavarad

    and on the horizon of eternity the Divine Face riseth out of the
    darkness,

va ma`nii-i A/ ``kulli shay'iN haalak illaa wajhihu'' /A mashhuud
gardad

    and the meaning of ``All on the earth shall pass away, but the
    face of thy Lord...'' is made manifest.


ey .habiib-i man naghamaat-i ruu.h-raa bi-jaan va dil guush kun va
chuun ba.sar .hif.z-ash namaa

    O My friend, listen with heart and soul to the songs of the
    spirit, and treasure them as thine own eyes.

kih hamiishih-i ayyaam ma`aarif-i il_ahii bi-mathaabih abr-i
neysaanii bar araa.dii-i quluub-i insaanii jaarii niist

    For the heavenly wisdoms, like the clouds of spring, will not
    rain down on the earth of men's hearts forever;

agar chih fey.d-i fayyaa.d-raa ta`.tiil-ii va ta`viiq-ii nah

    and though the grace of the All-Bounteous One is never stilled
    and never ceasing,

va l_akin har zamaan va `a.sr-raa rizq-ii ma`luum va ni`mat-ii
muqaddar ast va bi-qadr va andaazih ifaa.dih miishavad

    yet to each time and era a portion is allotted and a bounty set
    apart, this in a given measure.

A/ ``wa in min shay'iN illaa `indanaa khazaa i'nahu wa maa nazzalahu
illaa biqadriN ma`luum'' /A

    ``And no one thing is there, but with Us are its storehouses; and
    We send it not down but in settled measure.''

sa.haab-i ra.hmat-i jaanaan juz bar riiaa.d-i jaan nabaarad va dar
gheyr-i bahaar-aan iin karam nafarmaayad

    The cloud of the Loved One's mercy raineth only on the garden of
    the spirit, and bestoweth this bounty only in the season of
    spring.

fu.suul diigar-raa az iin fa.dl-i akbar na.siib-ii niist va
araa.dii-i jarzih-raa az iin karam qismat-ii nah

    The other seasons have no share in this greatest grace, and
    barren lands no portion of this favor.


ey baraadar har ba.hr-ii lu'lu' nadaarad va har shaakh-ii gul
nayaarad va bulbul bar aan nasaraayad

    O Brother!  Not every sea hath pearls; not every branch will
    flower, nor will the nightingale sing thereon.

pas taa bulbul-i buustaan-i ma`navii bi-gulistaan-i il_ahii baaz
nagasht

    Then, ere the nightingale of the mystic paradise repair to the
    garden of God,

va anvaar-i .sub.h-i ma`aanii bi-shams-i .haqiiqii raaji` nashud

    and the rays of the heavenly morning return to the Sun of
    Truth---

sa`ii kuniid kih shaayad dar iin gulkhan-i faanii buu'ii az gulshin-i
baaqii bishnaviid

    make thou an effort, that haply in this dustheap of the mortal
    world thou mayest catch a fragrance from the everlasting garden,

va dar .zil-i ahl-i iin madiinih-i jaaviid bimaaniid

    and live forever in the shadow of the peoples of this city.

va chuun bi-iin rutbih-i buland-i a`lY rasiidii va bi-iin darajih-i
`u.zmY faa'iz shudii

    And when thou hast attained this highest station and come to this
    mightiest plane,

yaar biinii va aghyaar faraamuush kunii

    then shalt thou gaze on the Beloved, and forget all else.

3.5in> yaar bii-pardih az dar o diivaar
3.5in> dar tajallii-ast yaa uulii al-ab.saar

    > The Beloved shineth on gate and wall 
    > Without a veil, O men of vision.


az qa.trih-i jaan gudhashtii va bi-ba.hr-i jaanaan vaa.sil shudii

    Now hast thou abandoned the drop of life and come to the sea of
    the Life-Bestower.

iin-ast maq.suud-ii kih .talab farmuudii inshaa al-ll_ah bi-aan
faa'iz shavii

    This is the goal thou didst ask for; if it be God's will, thou
    wilt gain it.


dar iin madiinih .hujibaat-i nuur ham kharq miishavad va zaa'il
miigardad

    In this city, even the veils of light are split asunder and
    vanish away.

A/ ``laa lijamaalihu .hijaabiN savY an-nuur wa laa livajhihi niqaabiN
illaa a.z-.zuhuur'' /A

    ``His beauty hath no veiling save light, His face no covering
    save revelation.''

ey `ajab kih yaar chuun shams aashkaar va aghyaar dar .talab-i
zakhaaruf va diinaar

    How strange that while the Beloved is visible as the sun, yet the
    heedless still hunt after tinsel and base metal.

balii az shiddat-i .zuhuur pinhaan maandih va az kithrat buruuz
makhfii gashtih

    Yea, the intensity of His revelation hath covered Him, and the
    fullness of His shining forth hath hidden Him.

4in> .haq `ayaan chuun mihr-i rakhshaan aamadih
4in> .heyf kandar shahr-i kuuraan aamadih

    > Even as the sun, bright hath He shined, 
    > But alas, He hath come to the town of the blind!


dar iin vaadii saalik maraatib-i va.hdat-i vujuud va shuhuud-raa .tey
namaayad

    In this Valley, the wayfarer leaveth behind him the stages of the
    ``oneness of Being and Manifestation''

va bi-va.hdat-ii kih muqaddas az iin do maqaam ast vaa.sil gardad

    and reacheth a oneness that is sanctified above these two
    stations.

a.hvaal pey bi-iin maqaal barad nah bayaan va jidaal

    Ecstasy alone can encompass this theme, not utterance nor
    argument;

va har kas dar-iin ma.hfil manzil guziidih va yaa az iin riiaa.d
nasiim-ii yaaftih miidaanad chih `ar.d miishavad

    and whosoever hath dwelt at this stage of the journey, or caught
    a breath from this garden land, knoweth whereof We speak.


va saalik baayad dar jamii`-i iin asfaar bi-qadr-i sha`r-ii az
sharii`at kih fii al-.haqiiqih sirr-i .tariiqat va thamarih-i
shajrih-i .haqiiqat ast in.hiraaf navarzad

    In all these journeys the traveler must stray not the breadth of
    a hair from the ``Law,'' for this is indeed the secret of the
    ``Path'' and the fruit of the Tree of ``Truth'';

va dar hamih-i maraatib bidheyl-i i.taa`at-i avaamir mutashabbith
baashad

    and in all these stages he must cling to the robe of obedience to
    the commandments,

va bi-.habl-i i`raa.d az manaahii mutamassik taa az ka's-i sharii`at
marzuuq shavad va bar asraar-i .haqiiqat vaaqif gardad

    and hold fast to the cord of shunning all forbidden things, that
    he may be nourished from the cup of the Law and informed of the
    mysteries of Truth.

va har chih az bayaanaat-i iin bandih mafhuum nashavad va tazalzul-ii
i.hdaath kunad baayad mujaddad su'aal shavad taa shubhih namaanad

    If any of the utterances of this Servant may not be comprehended,
    or may lead to perturbation, the same must be inquired of again,
    that no doubt may linger,

va maq.suud chuun .tal`at-i ma.hbuub az maqaam-i ma.hmuud .zaahir
gardad

    and the meaning be clear as the Face of the Beloved One shining
    from the ``Glorious Station.''


va iin asfaar kih aan-raa dar `aalam-i zamaan intihaa'ii padiid niist

    These journeys have no visible ending in the world of time,

saalik-i munqa.ti`-raa agar i`aanat-i gheybii birasad va valii-i amr
madad farmaayad

    but the severed wayfarer---if invisible confirmation descend upon
    him and the Guardian of the Cause assist him---

iin haft rutbih-raa dar haft qadam .tey namaayad balkih dar haft
nafas balkih dar yik nafas A/ idhaa shaa' al-ll_aha /A

    may cross these seven stages in seven steps, nay rather in seven
    breaths, nay rather in a single breath, if God will and desire
    it.

A/ wa araada wadh_alika min fa.dlihi `alY man yashaa' /A

    And this is of ``His grace on such of His servants as He
    pleaseth.''


.taayiraan-i havaa-i tuw.hiid va vaa.silaan-i lujjih-i tajriid iin
maqaam-raa kih maqaam-i baqaa' bi-al-ll_ah ast

    They who soar in the heaven of singleness and reach to the sea of
    the Absolute, reckon this city--- which is the station of life in
    God---

dar iin madiinih muntahY rutbih-i `aarifaan va muntahY va.tan-i
`aashiqaan shumurdih-and

    as the furthermost state of mystic knowers, and the farthest
    homeland of the lovers.

va nazd-i iin faanii ba.hr-i ma`nii-i iin maqaam avval shahr band-i
dil ast

    But to this evanescent One of the mystic ocean, this station is
    the first gate of the heart's citadel,

ya`anii avval varuud-i insaan ast bi-madiinih-i qalb

    that is, man's first entrance to the city of the heart;

va qalb-raa chihaar rutbih muqarrar ast

    and the heart is endowed with four stages

agar ahl-ash yaaft shud madhkuur aayad

    which would be recounted should a kindred soul be found.

4.25in> chuun qalam dar va.sf-i iin .haalat rasiid
4.25in> ham qalam bi-shikast o ham kaaghadh dariid

    > When the pen set to picturing this station, 
    > It broke in pieces and the page was torn.

A/ wa as-salaam /A

    <<^salaam>>!


ey .habiib-i man iin ghazaal-i .sa.hraa-i a.hadiyyih-raa kalaab-ii
chand dar pey

    O My friend!  Many a hound pursueth this gazelle of the desert of
    oneness;

va iin bulbul-i bustaan-i .samadiyyih-raa manqaar-ii chand dar
ta`aaqub

    many a talon claweth at this thrush of the eternal garden.

va iin .taayir-i havaa-i il_ahii-raa ghuraab-i kiin dar kamiin va iin
.seyd-i barr-i `ishq-raa .sayyaad-i .hasad dar `aqab

    Pitiless ravens do lie in wait for this bird of the heavens of
    God, and the huntsman of envy stalketh this deer of the meadow of
    love.


ey sheykh himat-raa zujaaj kun kih shaayad iin siraaj-raa az
baad-haa-i mukhaalif .hif.z namaayad

    O <<^shaykh>>!  Make of thine effort a glass, perchance it may
    shelter this flame from the contrary winds;

agar chih iin siraaj-raa umiid chinaan ast kih dar zujaajih-i il_ahii
mushta`il gardad va dar mushkuuT ma`nav-ii bar-afruuzad

    albeit this light doth long to be kindled in the lamp of the
    Lord, and to shine in the globe of the spirit.

ziiraa gardan-ii kih bi-`ishq-i il_ahii buland shud albatih
bi-shamshiir uftad

    For the head raised up in the love of God will certainly fall by
    the sword,

va sar-ii kih bi-.hubb bar-afraakht albattih bi-baad ravad

    and the life that is kindled with longing will surely be
    sacrificed,

va qalb-ii kih bi-dhikr ma.hbuub peyvast albattih pur khuun gardad

    and the heart which remembereth the Loved One will surely brim
    with blood.

A/ fana`am maa qaal /A

    How well is it said:

4in> A/ wa`ash khaaliyaN fa-al-.hubbi raa.hataN `anaa
4in> fa-avvalahu suqmiN wa aakhirihu' qatliN /A

    > Live free of love, for its very peace is anguish;
    > Its beginning is pain, its end is death.


A/ wa as-salaamu `alY man ittaba`a al-hudY /A

    Peace be upon him who followeth the Right Path!


aanchih az badaayi`-i fikr dar ma`nii-i .tayr-i ma`ruuf kih
bi-faarsii gunjishk miinaamand dhikr farmuudand ma`luum va mu.haqqaq
shud

    The thoughts thou hast expressed as to the interpretation of the
    common species of bird that is called in Persian <<^gunjishk>>
    (sparrow) were considered.

guuyaa bar asraar-i ma`aanii vaaqif shudih-and

    Thou appearest to be well-grounded in mystic truth.

va l_akin har .harf-ii-raa dar har `aalam-ii bi-iqti.daa-i aan
maq.suud-ii muqarrar ast

    However, on every plane, to every letter a meaning is allotted
    which relateth to that plane.

balii saalikiin az har ism-ii ramz-ii va az har .harf-ii sirr-ii
idraak miinamaayand

    Indeed, the wayfarer findeth a secret in every name, a mystery in
    every letter.

va iin .huruufaat dar maqaam-ii ishaarih bi-taqdiis ast

    In one sense, these letters refer to holiness.


A/ k ay kaffa nafsika `ammaa yashtahiihu huwa 'aka thumma aqbil ilY
muwl_a'ika /A

    <<^kaaf>> or <<^gaaf>> (K or G) referreth to <<^kuffih>>
    (``free''), that is, ``Free thyself from that which thy passion
    desireth; then advance unto thy Lord.''


A/ n nazih nafsika `ammaa sava'ih litafdiya bi-ruu.hika fii hava'ih
/A

    <<^nuun>> referreth to <<^nazzih>> (``purify''), that is,
    ``Purify thyself from all else save Him, that thou mayest
    surrender thy life in His love.''


A/ j jaanibi jinaabu al-.haqq in baqiya fiika min .sifaati al-khalq
/A

    <<^jiim>> is <<^jaanib>> (``draw back''), that is, ``Draw back
    from the threshold of the True One if thou still possessest
    earthly attributes.''


A/ sh ashkur rabbika fii ar.dihu liyashkurika fii samaa'ihu wa in
kaanati as-samaa' fii `aalamu al-a.hadiyyih nafsi ar.dahu /A

    <<^shiin>> is <<^ashkur>> (``thank'')---``Thank thy Lord on His
    earth that He may bless thee in His heaven; albeit in the world
    of oneness, this heaven is the same as His earth.''


A/ k kaffir `anka al-.hujibaati al-ma.hduudaTi lita`rifa maalaa
`araftahu min al-maqaamaati al-qudsiyyaTi wa inaka luwtasma`a
naghamaat /A

    <<^kaaf>> referreth to <<^kaffir>>, that is: ``Take off from
    thyself the wrappings of limitations, that thou mayest come to
    know what thou hast not known of the states of Sanctity.''


A/ h_adhahi a.t-.teyri al-faaniyaT lita.tluba min al-ku'usi
al-baaqiyyaTi ad-daa'imaT wa tatraka al-ku'ubi al-faaniyyaTi
az-zaa'ilaT /A

    Wert thou to harken to the melodies of this mortal Bird, then
    wouldst thou seek out the undying chalice and pass by every
    perishable cup.


A/ wa as-salaamu `alY man ittaba`a al-hudY /A

    Peace be upon those who walk in the Right Path!
